CHAPTER II. 

INTRODUCTION. 

11. In the investigation of electrical phenomena, currents 
and potential differences, whether continuous or alternating, 
are usually treated as stationary phenomena. That is, the 
assumption is made that after establishing the circuit a sufficient 
time has elapsed for the currents and potential differences to 
reach their final or permanent values, that is, become constant, 
with continuous current, or constant periodic functions of time, 
with alternating current. In the first moment, however, after 
establishing the circuit, the currents and potential differences 
in the circuit have not yet reached their permanent values, 
that is, the electrical conditions of the circuit are not yet the 
normal or permanent ones, but a certain time elapses while the 
electrical conditions adjust themselves. 

12. For instance, a continuous e.m.f., eOJ impressed upon a 
circuit of resistance r, produces and maintains in the circuit a 
current, 


In the moment of closing the circuit of e.m.f. e0 on resistance r, 
the current in the circuit is zero. Hence, after closing the circuit 
the current i has to rise from zero to its final value i0. If the 
circuit contained only resistance but no inductance, this would 
take place instantly, that is, there would be no transition period. 
Every circuit, however, contains some inductance. The induc- 
tance L of the circuit means L interlinkages of the circuit with 
lines of magnetic force produced by unit current in the circuit, 
or iL interlinkages by current i. That is, in establishing current 
i0 in the circuit, the magnetic flux iQL must be produced. A 
change of the magnetic flux iL surrounding a circuit generates 
in the circuit an e.m.f., 

d 

e - * 

16 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


This opposes the impressed e.m.f. e0, and therefore lowers the 
e.m.f. available to produce the current, and thereby the current, 
which then cannot instantly assume its final value, but rises 
thereto gradually, and so between the starting of the circuit 
and the establishment of permanent condition a transition 
period appears. In the same manner and for the same reasons, 
if the impressed e.m.f. eQ is withdrawn, but the circuit left closed, 
the current i does not instantly disappear but gradually dies 
out, as shown in Fig. 1, which gives the rise and the decay of a 


^ 

,__— • 

IS 

1 

/ 

\ 

5 

-2- 

KM 

?/i 

1 

/ 

1 1 

\ 

I, = 

• 

01 

en 

r.v- 

1° 

\ 

I 

a 

a 

\ 

1 

< 

\ 

/ 

V 

/ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

s 

' — , 

-*^. 

-0- 

( 

1 

I 

I 

, 

5 

! 

i 

j 

; 

L 

I 

1 

! 

I 

5 

Seconds 


Fig. 1. Rise and decay of continuous current in an inductive circuit. 

continuous current in an inductive circuit: the exciting current 
of an alternator field, or a circuit having the constants r = 12 
ohms; L = 6 henrys, and eQ = 240 volts; the abscissas being 
seconds of time. 

13. If an electrostatic condenser of capacity C is connected 
to a continuous e.m.f. e0, no current exists, in stationary con- 
dition, in this direct-current circuit (except that a very small 
current may leak through the insulation or the dielectric of the 
condenser), but the condenser is charged to the potential dif- 
ference eo; or contains the electrostatic charge 

Q = to0. 

In the moment of closing the circuit of e.m.f. e0 upon the 
capacity C, the condenser contains no charge, that is, zero 
potential difference exists at the condenser terminals. If there 
were no resistance and no inductance in the circuit in the 


18 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

moment of closing the circuit, an infinite current would exist 
charging the condenser instantly to the potential difference e0. 
If r is the resistance of the direct-current circuit containing the 
condenser, and this circuit contains no inductance, the current 

Q 

starts at the value i = - , that is, in the first moment after 

closing the circuit all the impressed e.m.f. is consumed by the 
current in the resistance, since no charge and therefore no 
potential difference exists at the condenser. With increasing 
charge of the condenser, and therefore increasing potential 
difference at the condenser terminals, less and less e.m.f. is 
available for the resistance, and the current decreases, and 
ultimately becomes zero, when the condenser is fully charged. 

If the circuit also contains inductance L, then the current 
cannot rise instantly but only gradually: in the moment after 
closing the circuit the potential difference at the condenser is 
still zero, and rises at such a rate that the increase of magnetic 
flux iL in the inductance produces an e.m.f. Ldi/dt, which 
consumes the impressed e.m.f. Gradually the potential differ- 
ence at the condenser increases with its increasing charge, and 
the current and thereby the e.m.f. consumed by the resistance 
increases, and so less e.m.f. being available for consumption by 
the inductance, the current increases more slowly, until ulti- 
mately it ceases to rise, has reached a maximum, the inductance 
consumes no e.m.f., but all the impressed e.m.f. is consumed by 
the current in the resistance and by the potential difference at 
the condenser. The potential difference at the condenser con- 
tinues to rise with its increasing charge; hence less e.m.f. is 
available for the resistance, that is, the current decreases again, 
and ultimately becomes zero, when the condenser is fully 
charged. During the decrease of current the decreasing mag- 
netic flux iL in the inductance produces an e.m.f., which assists 
the impressed e.m.f., and so retards somewhat the decrease of 
current. 

Fig. 2 shows the charging current of a condenser through an 
inductive circuit, as i, and the potential difference at the con- 
denser terminals, as e, with a continuous impressed e.m.f. e0, 
for the circuit constants r = 250 ohms; L = 100 mh.; C = 
10 mf., and e0 = 1000 volts. 

If the resistance is very small, the current immediately after 


INTRODUCTION 


19 


closing the circuit rises very rapidly, quickly charges the con- 
denser, but at the moment where the condenser is fully charged 
to the impressed e.m.f. e0, current still exists. This current 
cannot instantly stop, since the decrease of current and there- 
with the decrease of its magnetic flux iL generates an e.m.f., 


1000 


4 — 800 


Fig. 2. Charging a condenser through a circuit having resistance and 
inductance. Constant potential. Logarithmic charge: high resistance. 

which maintains the current, or retards its decrease. Hence 
electricity still continues to flow into the condenser for some 
time after it is fully charged, and when the current ultimately 
stops, the condenser is overcharged, that is, the potential dif- 
ference at the condenser terminals is higher than the impressed 
e.m.f. e0, and as result the condenser has partly to discharge 
again, that is, electricity begins to flow in the opposite direction, 
or out of the condenser. In the same manner this reverse 
current, due to the inductance of the circuit, overreaches and 
discharges the condenser farther than down to the impressed 
e.m.f. e0, so that after the discharge current stops again a charg- 
ing current — now less than the initial charging current - 
starts, and so by a series of oscillations, overcharges and under- 
charges, the condenser gradually charges itself, and ultimately 
the current dies out. 

Fig. 3 shows the oscillating charge of a condenser through an 
inductive circuit, by a continuous impressed e.m.f. e0. The 
current is represented by i, the potential difference at the con- 
denser terminals by e, with the time as abscissas. The con- 
stants of the circuit are: r = 40 ohms; L = 100 mh.; C = 
10 mf., and eQ = 1000 volts. 

In such a continuous-current circuit, containing resistance, 
inductance, and capacity in series to each other, the current at 
the moment of closing the circuit as well as the final current 


20 


TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 


is zero, but a current exists immediately after closing the 
circuit, as a transient phenomenon; a temporary current, 
steadily increasing and then decreasing again to zero, or con- 
sisting of a number of alternations of successively decreasing 
amplitude : an oscillating current. 

If the circuit contains no resistance and inductance, the cur- 
rent into the condenser would theoretically be infinite. That 


f 

s 

N 

6 1200 

/ 

A 

\ 

\ 

^ 

x^ 

* H 

4 7? 8004— f 

1 

\ 

\ 

^\? 

- — 

4 oSOOJ-4 

/ 

\ 

^ 

x* 

!^° 

«• 

=1000 

vo 
oh 
ml 

ts 

o , Ann 1 1 

L4= 100 

, 

a lJyJ7 

\ 

. 

V 

\ 

c 

= 

10 

mf. 

\6 

=, 

Dt 

gr^es 

AT 

S 

k 

r^ 

•— ^ 

8 

u 

It 

U\ 
' 

"2A 

tO 

8 

!7 

4 

0 

45 

0 

5( 

< 

&J 

^s 

^2 

0 

/ 

\ 

1 

-4 . 1 — 

\ 

s t 

/ 

Fig. 3. Charging a condenser through a circuit having resistance and 
inductance. Constant potential. Oscillating charge: low resistance. 

is, with low resistance and low inductance, the charging current 
of a condenser may be. enormous, and therefore, although only 
transient, requires very serious consideration and investigation. 
If the resistance is very low and the inductance appreciable, 
the overcharge of the condenser may raise its voltage above 
the impressed e.m.f.,e0 sufficiently to cause disruptive effects. 
14. If an alternating e.m.f., 

e = E cos 0, 

is impressed upon a circuit of such constants that the current 
lags 45°, that is, the current is 

i = I cos (d - 45°), 

and the circuit is closed at the moment 6 = 45°, at this 
moment the current should be at its maximum value. It is, 
however, zero, and since in a circuit containing inductance (that 
is, in practically any circuit) the current cannot change instantly, 
it follows that in this case the current gradually rises from zero 
as initial value to the permanent value of the sine wave i. 
This approach of the current from the initial value, in the 


INTRODUCTION 


21 


present case zero, to the final value of the curve i, can either 
be gradual, as shown by the curve il of Fig. 4, or by a series 
of oscillations of gradually decreasing amplitude, as shown by 
curve i2 of Fig. 4. 

15. The general solution of an electric current problem there- 
fore includes besides the permanent term, constant or periodic, 


l 


/i 


>c- 


Gradual or Logarithm o start of current: 


Oscillatory or 1 


S 


arjthui e start 
rigonometrio s 

I**™** 


[rtartV 


Fig. 4. Starting of an alternating-current circuit having inductance. 

a transient term, which disappears after a time depending upon 
the circuit conditions, from an extremely small fraction of a 
second to a number of seconds. 

These transient terms appear in closing the circuit, opening 
the circuit, or in any other way changing the circuit conditions, 
as by a change of load, a change of impedance, etc. 

In general, in a circuit containing resistance and inductance 
only, but no capacity, the transient terms of current and volt- 
age are not sufficiently large and of long duration to cause 
harmful nor even appreciable effects, and it is mainly in circuits 
containing capacity that excessive values of current and poten- 
tial difference may be reached by the transient term, and there- 
with serious results occur. The investigation of transient terms 
therefore is largely an investigation of the effects of electro- 
static capacity. 

16. No transient terms result from the resistance, but only 
those circuit constants which represent storage of energy, mag- 
netically by the inductance L, electrostatically by the capacity 
C, give rise to transient phenomena, and the more the resist- 


22 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

ance predominates, the less is therefore the severity and dura- 
tion of the transient term. 

When closing a circuit containing inductance or capacity 
or both, the energy stored in the inductance and the capacity 
has first to be supplied by the impressed e.m.f. before the 
circuit conditions can become stationary. That is, in the first 
moment after closing an electric circuit, or in general changing 
the circuit conditions, tne impressed e.m.f., or rather the source 
producing the impressed e.m.f., has, in addition to the power 
consumed in maintaining the circuit, to supply the power which 
stores energy in inductance and capacity, and so a transient 
term appears immediately after any change of circuit condi- 
tion. If the circuit contains only one energy-storing constant, 
as either inductance or capacity, the transient term, which 
connects the initial with the stationary condition of the circuit, 
necessarily can be a steady logarithmic term only, or a gradual 
approach. An oscillation can occur only with the existence of 
two energy-storing constants, as capacity and inductance, which 
permit a surge of energy from the one to the other, and there- 
with an overreaching. 

17. Transient terms may occur periodically and in rapid suc- 
cession, as when rectifying an alternating current by synchro- 
nously reversing the connections of the alternating impressed 
e.m.f. with the receiver circuit (as can be done mechanically 
or without moving apparatus by undirectional conductors, as 
arcs). At every half wave the circuit reversal starts a tran- 
sient term, and usually this transient term has not yet disap- 
peared, frequently not even greatly decreased, when the next 
reversal again starts a transient term. These transient terms 
may predominate to such an extent that the current essentially 
consists of a series of successive transient terms. 

18. If a condenser is charged through an inductance, and the 
condenser shunted by a spark gap set for a lower voltage than 
the impressed, then the spark gap discharges as soon as the 
condenser charge has reached a certain value, and so starts a 
transient term; the condenser charges again, and discharges, 
and so by the successive charges and discharges of the condenser 
a series of transient terms is produced, recurring at a frequency 
depending upon the circuit constants and upon the ratio of the 
disruptive voltage of the spark gap to the impressed e.m.f. 


INTRODUCTION 


23 


>uch a phenomenon for instance occurs when on a high- 
potential alternating-current system a weak spot appears in the 
cable insulation and permits a spark discharge to pass to the 
ground, that is, in shunt to the condenser formed by the cable 
conductor and the cable armor or ground. 

19. In most cases the transient phenomena occurring in 
electric circuits immediately after a change of circuit conditions 
are of no importance, due to their short duration. They 
require serious consideration, however, - 

(a) In those cases where they reach excessive values. Thus 
in connecting a large transformer to an alternator the large 
initial value of current may do damage. In short-circuiting a 
large alternator, while the permanent or stationary short-circuit 
current is not excessive and represents little power, the very 
much larger momentary short-circuit current may be beyond 
the capacity of automatic circuit-opening devices and cause 
damage by its high power. In high-potential transmissions 
the potential differences produced by these transient terms may 
reach values so high above the normal voltage as to cause 
disruptive effects. 

(6) Lightning, high-potential surges, etc., are in their nature 
essentially transient phenomena, usually of oscillating character. 

(c) The periodical production of transient terms of oscillating 
character is one of the foremost means of generating electric cur- 
rents of very high frequency as used in wireless telegraphy, etc. 

(d) In alternating-current rectifying apparatus, by which the 
direction of current in a part of the circuit is reversed every half 
wave, and the current so made unidirectional, the stationary 
condition of the current in the alternating part of the circuit is 
usually never reached, and the transient term is frequently of 
primary importance. 

(e) In telegraphy the current in the receiving apparatus 
essentially depends on the transient terms, and in long-distance 
cable telegraphy the stationary condition of current is never 
approached, and the speed of telegraphy depends on the duration 
of the transient terms. 

(f) Phenomena of the same character, but with space instead 
of time as independent variable, are the distribution of voltage 
and current in a long-distance transmission line; the phenomena 
occurring in niultigap lightning arresters; the transmission of 


24 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

current impulses in telephony; the distribution of alternating 
current in a conductor, as the rail return of a single-phase railway; 
the distribution of alternating magnetic flux in solid magnetic 
material, etc. 

Some of the simpler forms of transient terms are investigated 
and discussed in the following pages.
