CHAPTER I. 

THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT. 

1. To transmit electric energy from one place where it is 
generated to another place where it is used, an electric cir- 
cuit is required, consisting of conductors which connect the 
point of generation with the point of utilization. 

When electric energy flows through a circuit, phenomena 
take place inside of the conductor as well as in the space out- 
side of the conductor. 

In the conductor, during the flow of electric energy through 
the circuit, electric energy is consumed continuously by being 
converted into heat. Along the circuit, from the generator 
to the receiver circuit, the flow of energy steadily decreases 
by the amount consumed in the conductor, and a power gradi- 
ent exists in the circuit along or parallel with the conductor. 

(Thus, while the voltage may decrease from generator to 
receiver circuit, as is usually the case, or may increase, as in 
an alternating-current circuit with leading current, and while 
the current may remain constant throughout the circuit, or 
decrease, as in a transmission line of considerable capacity 
with a leading or non-inductive receiver circuit, the flow of 
energy always decreases from generating to receiving circuit, 
and the power gradient therefore is characteristic of the direc- 
tion of the flow of energy.) 

In the space outside of the conductor, during the flow of 
energy through the circuit, a condition of stress exists which 
is called the electric field of the conductor. That is, the 
surrounding space is not uniform, but has different electric 
and magnetic properties in different directions. 

No power is required to maintain the electric field, but energy 

3 


4 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

is required to produce the electric field, and this energy is 
returned, more or less completely, when the electric field dis- 
appears by the stoppage of the flow of energy. 

Thus, in starting the flow of electric energy, before a perma- 
nent condition is reached, a finite time must elapse during 
which the energy of the electric field is stored, and the generator 
therefore gives more power than consumed in the conductor 
and delivered at the receiving end; again, the flow of electric 
energy cannot be stopped instantly, but first the energy stored 
in the electric field has to be expended. As result hereof, 
where the flow of electric energy pulsates, as in an alternating- 
current circuit, continuously electric energy is stored in the 
field during a rise of the power, and returned to the circuit 
again during a decrease of the power. 

The electric field of the conductor exerts magnetic and elec- 
trostatic actions. 

The magnetic action is a maximum in the direction concen- 
tric, or approximately so, to the conductor. That is, a needle- 
shaped magnetizable body, as an iron needle, tends to set itself 
in a direction concentric to the conductor. 

The electrostatic action has a maximum in a direction radial, 
or approximately so, to the conductor. That is, a light needle- 
shaped conducting body, if the electrostatic component of the 
field is powerful enough, tends to set itself in a direction radial 
to the conductor, and light bodies are attracted or repelled 
radially to the conductor. 

Thus, the electric field of a circuit over which energy flows 
has three main axes which are at right angles with each other: 

The electromagnetic axis, concentric with the conductor. 

The electrostatic axis, radial to the conductor. 

The power gradient, parallel to the conductor. 

This is frequently expressed pictorially by saying that the 
lines of magnetic force of the circuit are concentric, the lines 
of electrostatic force radial to the conductor. 

Where, as is usually the case, the electric circuit consists of 
several conductors, the electric fields of the conductors super- 
impose upon each other, and the resultant lines of magnetic 
and of electrostatic forces are not concentric and radial respec- 
tively, except approximately in the immediate neighborhood 
of the conductor. 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 5 

In the electric field between parallel conductors the magnetic 
and the electrostatic lines of force are conjugate pencils of circles. 

2. Neither the power consumption in the conductor, nor 
the electromagnetic field, nor the electrostatic field, are pro- 
portional to the flow of energy through the circuit. 

The product, however, of the intensity of the magnetic field, 
<f>, and the intensity of the electrostatic field, "^ is proportional 
to the flow of energy or the power, P, and the power P is there- 
fore resolved into a product of two components, i and e, which 
are chosen proportional respectively to the intensity of the 
magnetic field <I> and of the electrostatic field V. 

That is, putting 

P = ie (1) 

we have 

<E> = Li = the intensity of the electromagnetic field. (2) 
Mf = Ce = the intensity of the electrostatic field. (3) 

The component i, called the current, is defined as that factor 
of the electric power P which is proportional to the magnetic 
field, and the other component e, called the voltage, is defined 
as that factor of the electric power P which is proportional to 
the electrostatic field. 

Current i and voltage e, therefore, are mathematical fictions, 
factors of the power P, introduced to represent respectively the 
magnetic and the electrostatic or " dielectric " phenomena. 

The current i is measured by the magnetic action of a circuit, 
as in the ammeter; the voltage e, by the electrostatic action of 
a circuit, as in the electrostatic voltmeter, or by producing a 
current i by the voltage e and measuring this current i by its 
magnetic action, in the usual voltmeter. 

The coefficients L and (7, which are the proportionality factors 
of the magnetic and of the dielectric component of the electric 
field, are called the inductance and the capacity of the circuit, 
respectively. 

As electric power P is resolved into the product of current i 
and voltage e, the power loss in the conductor, Ph therefore can 
also be resolved into a product of current i and voltage et 
which is consumed in the conductor. That is, 

P, = iet. 


6 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

It is found that the voltage consumed in the conductor, eh is 
proportional to the factor i of the power P, that is, 

et = ri, (4) 

where r is the proportionality factor of the voltage consumed 
by the loss of power in the conductor, or by the power gradient, 
and is called the resistance of the circuit. 

Any electric circuit therefore must have three constants, 
r, L, and (7, where 

r = circuit constant representing the power gradient, or the 
loss of power in the conductor, called resistance. 

L = circuit constant representing the intensity of the electro- 
magnetic component of the electric field of the circuit, 
called inductance. 

C = circuit constant representing the intensity of the electro- 
static component of the electric field of the circuit, called 
capacity. 

3. A change of the magnetic field of the conductor, that is, 
of the number of lines of magnetic force </> surrounding the 
conductor, generates an e.m.f. 

'-3 <•> 

in the conductor and thus absorbs a power 

*"-*-<£ (6) 

or, by equation (2) : <J> = Li by definition, thus : 

d& , di i r>/ T • di 

- = L-,and: P' = Lt-, (7) 

and the total energy absorbed by the magnetic field during the 
rise of current from zero to i is 


WM --P'dt (8) 

= LJidi, 


that is, ,, 


WM - (9) 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 1 

A change of the dielectric field of the conductor, ^, absorbs 
a current proportional to the change of the dielectric field : 


and absorbs the power 
or, by equation (3), 


P»=ei'=e—, (11) 


(12) 


and the total energy absorbed by the dielectric field during a 
rise of voltage from 0 to 6 is 


WK ==p"dt (13) 

= cfede, 


that is *n 


The power consumed in the conductor by its resistance r is 

Pr = ieh (15) 

and thus, by equation (4), 

Pr = tV. (16) 

That is, when the electric power 

P = ei (1) 
exists in a circuit, it is 
pr = tfr = power lost in the conductor, (16) 

WM = l— = energy stored in the magnetic field of the circuit, (9) 


l 

Ll 


W K = — = energy stored in the dielectric field of the cir- 
£t 

cuit, (14) 


8 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

and the three circuit constants r, L, C therefore appear as the 
components of the energy conversion into heat, magnetism, and 
electric stress, respectively, in the circuit. 

4. The circuit constant, resistance r, depends only on the 
size and material of the conductor, but not on the position of 
the conductor in space, nor on the material filling the space 
surrounding the conductor, nor on the shape of the conductor 
section. 

The circuit constants, inductance L and capacity (7, almost 
entirely depend on the position of the conductor in space, on 
the material filling the space surrounding the conductor, and 
on the shape of the conductor section, but do not depend on 
the material of the conductor, except to that small extent as 
represented by the electric field inside of the conductor section. 

5. The resistance r is proportional to the length and inversely 
proportional to the section of the conductor, 

r = plT' (IV) 

J\. 

where p is a constant of the material, called the resistivity or 
specific resistance. 

For different materials, p varies probably over a far greater 
range than almost any other physical quantity. Given in ohms 
per centimeter cube,* it is, approximately, at ordinary tem- 
peratures : 

Metals: Cu .................. ........... 1 . 6 X lO"6 

Al. .., ......................... 2.5 X 10-6 

Fe .............................. 10 X 10-6 

Hg ............................. 94 X 10-6 

Gray cast iron .............. up to 100 X 10~6 

High-resistance alloys ....... up to 150 X 10~8 

Electrolytes: N03H ............. down to 1 .3 at 30 per cent 

KOH ............. down to 1 . 9 at 25 per cent 

NaCL . ............ down to 4 . 7 at 25 per cent 

up to 

Pure river water ....................... . 104 

and over alcohols, oils, etc., to practically infinity. 

Meaning a conductor of one centimeter length and one square centimeter 


* 
section. 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 9 

So-called ' ' insulators" : 

Fiber about 1012 

Paraffin oil about IQ» 

Paraffin about 1014 to 1016 

Mica about 1014 

G1ass about 1014 to 1016 

Rubber about 1016 

Air practically oo 

In the wide gap between the highest resistivity of metal 
alloys, about p = 150 X 10~6, and the lowest resistivity of 
electrolytes, about p = 1, are 

Carbon: metallic down to 100 X 10~6 

amorphous (dense) 0.04 and higher 

anthracite very high 

Silicon and Silicon Alloys: 

Cast silicon 1 down to 0 . 04 

Ferro silicon 0.04 down to 50 X 10~a 

The resistivity of arcs and of Geissler tube discharges is of about 
the same magnitude as electrolytic resistivity. 

The resistivity, p, is usually a function of the temperature, 
rising slightly with increase of temperature in metallic conduct- 
ors and decreasing in electrolytic conductors. Only with few 
materials, as silicon, the temperature variation of p is so enor- 
mous that p can no longer be c.onsidered as even approximately 
constant for all currents i which give a considerable tempera- 
ture rise in the conductor. Such materials are commonly 
called pyroelectrolytes. 

6. The inductance L is proportional to the section and 
inversely proportional to the length of the magnetic circuit 
surrounding the conductor, and so can be represented by 

L = ^ (18) 

where /* is a constant of the material filling the space surround- 
ing the conductor, which is called the magnetic permeability. 

As in general neither section nor length is constant in differ- 
ent parts of the magnetic circuit surrounding an electric con- 


10 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

ductor, the magnetic circuit has as a rule to be calculated 
piecemeal, or by integration over the space occupied by it. 

The permeability, /*, is constant and equals unity or very 
closely fj. = 1 for all substances, with the exception of a few 
materials which are called the magnetic materials, as iron, 
cobalt, nickel, etc., in which it is very much higher, reaching 
sometimes and under certain conditions in iron values as high 
as fjL = 6000. 

In these magnetic materials the permeability /* is not con- 
stant but varies with the magnetic flux density, or number of 
lines of magnetic force per unit section, (B, decreasing rapidly 
for high values of (B. 

In such materials the use of the term /* is therefore incon- 
venient, and the inductance, L, is calculated by the relation 
between the magnetizing force as given in ampere-turns per 
unit length of magnetic circuit, or by "field intensity," and 
magnetic induction (B. 

The magnetic induction (B in magnetic materials is the sum 
of the "space induction" 3C, corresponding to unit permeability, 
plus the "metallic induction" (B', which latter reaches a finite 
limiting value. That is, 

(B = 3C + (&'. (19) 

The limiting values, or so-called "saturation values," of (B' 
are approximately, in lines of magnetic force per square centi- 
meter: 

Iron .20,000 

Cobalt 12,000- 

Nickel 6,000 

Magnetite 5,000 

Manganese alloys up to 4,000 

The inductance, L, therefore is a constant of the circuit if 
the space surrounding the conductor contains no magnetic 
material, and is more or less variable with the current, i, if 
magnetic material exists in the space surrounding the conductor. 
In the latter case, with increasing current, i, the inductance, L, 
first slightly increases, reaches a maximum, and then decreases, 
approaching as limiting value the value which it would have in 
the absence of the magnetic material. 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 11 

7. The capacity, C, is proportional to the section and inversely 
proportional to the length of the electrostatic field of the con- 
ductor: 

^ *A 

G = T, (20) 

where K is a constant of the material filling the space surround- 
ing the conductor, which is called the "dielectric constant," or 
the " specific capacity/' or " permittivity." 

Usually the section and the length of the different parts of 
the electrostatic circuit are different, and the capacity therefore 
has to be calculated piecemeal, or by integration. 

The dielectric constant K of different materials varies over a 
relative narrow range only. It is approximately: 

AC = 1 in the vacuum, in air and in other gases, 
K = 2 to 3 in oils, paraffins, fiber, etc., 
K = 3 to 4 in rubber and gutta-percha, 
K = 3 to 5 in glass, mica, etc., 

reaching values as high as 7 to 8 in organic compounds of heavy 
metals, as lead stearate, and about 12 in sulphur. 

The dielectric constant, /c, is practically constant for all voltages 
e, up to that voltage at which the electrostatic field intensity, 
or the electrostatic gradient, that is, the "volts per centimeter," 
exceeds a certain value d, which depends upon the material and 
which is called the "dielectric strength" or "disruptive strength" 
of the material. At this potential gradient the medium breaks 
down mechanically, by puncture, and ceases to insulate, but 
electricity passes and so equalizes the potential gradient. 

The disruptive strength, d, given in volts per centimeter is 
approximately : 

Air: 32,000. 

Oils: 250,000 to 1,000,000. 

Mica: up to 4,000,000. 

The capacity, (7, of a circuit therefore is constant up to the 
voltage e, at which at some place of the electrostatic field the 
dielectric strength is exceeded, disruption takes place, and a 
part of the surrounding space therefore is made conducting, and 
by this increase of the effective size of the conductor the capacity 
C is increased. 


12 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

8. Of the amount of energy consumed in creating the electric 
field of the circuit not all is returned at the disappearance of 
the electric field, but a part is consumed by conversion into heat 
in producing or in any other way changing the electric field. 
That is, the conversion of electric energy into and from the 
electromagnetic and electrostatic stress is not complete, but a 
loss of energy occurs, especially with the magnetic field in the 
so-called magnetic materials, and with the electrostatic field in 
unhomogeneous dielectrics. 

The energy loss in the production and reconversion of the 
magnetic component of the field can be represented by an 
effective resistance rr which adds itself to the resistance r0 of 
the conductor and more or less increases it. 

The energy loss in the electrostatic field can be represented 
by an effective resistance r" , shunting across the circuit, and 
consuming an energy current i" , in addition to the current i in 
the conductor. Usually, instead of an effective resistance r", 
its reciprocal is used, that is, the energy loss in the electro- 
static field represented by a shunted conductance g. 

In its most general form the electric circuit therefore contains 
the constants : 

1. Inductance L, storing 'the energy, -— , 

ft 


2. Capacity C, storing the energy, - — > 

& 

3. Resistance r = r0 + r', consuming the power, tfr = ? 

4. Conductance g} consuming the power, ezg, 

where r0 is the resistance of the conductor, r' the effective resist- 
ance representing the power loss in the magnetic field L, and g 
represents the power loss in the electrostatic field C. 

9. If of the three components of the electric field, the electro- 
magnetic stress, electrostatic stress, and the power gradient, one 
equals zero, a second one must equal zero also. That is, either 
all of the three components exist or only one exists. 

Electric systems in which the magnetic component of the 
field is absent, while the electrostatic component may be consider- 
able, are represented for instance by an electric generator or 
a battery on open circuit, or by the electrostatic machine. In 
such systems the disruptive effects due to high voltage, there- 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 13 

fore, are most pronounced, while the power is negligible, and 
phenomena of this character are usually called " static." 

Electric systems in which the electrostatic component of the 
field is absent, while the electromagnetic component is consider- 
able, are represented for instance by the short-circuited secondary 
coil of a transformer, in which no potential difference and, there- 
fore, no electrostatic field exists, since the generated e.m.f. is 
consumed at the place of generation. Practically negligible also 
is the electrostatic component in all low-voltage circuits. 

The effect of the resistance on the flow of electric energy in 
industrial applications is restricted to fairly narrow limits: as 
the resistance of the circuit consumes power and thus lowers the 
efficiency of the electric transmission, it is uneconomical to 
permit too high a resistance. As lower resistance requires a 
larger expenditure of conductor material, it is usually uneco- 
nomical to lower the resistance of the circuit below that which, 
gives a reasonable efficiency. 

As result hereof, practically always the relative resistance, 
that is, the ratio of the power lost in the resistance to the total 
power, lies between 2 per cent and 20 per cent. 

It is different with the inductance L and the capacity C. Of 

the two forms of stored energy, the magnetic — and electro- 

e*C 

static , usually one is so small that it can be neglected com- 

fk 

pared with the other, and the electric circuit with sufficient 
approximation treated as containing resistance and inductance, 
or resistance and capacity only. 

In the so-called electrostatic machine and its applications, 
frequently only capacity and resistance come into consideration. 

In all lighting and power distribution circuits, direct current 
or alternating current, as the 110- and 220-volt lighting circuits, 
the 500-volt railway circuits, the 2000-volt primary distribution 
circuits, due to the relatively low voltage, the electrostatic 

energy - ^ is still so very small compared with the electro- 

2 

magnetic energy, that the capacity C can for most purposes be 
neglected and the circuit treated as containing resistance and 
inductance only. 


14 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

Of approximately equal magnitude is the electromagnetic 

energy —— and the electrostatic energy - ^ in the high-potential 

Zi iL 

long-distance transmission circuit, in the telephone circuit, and 
in the condenser discharge, and so in most of the phenomena 
resulting from lightning or other disturbances. In these cases 
all three circuit constants, r, L, and C, are of essential impor- 
tance. 

10. In an electric circuit of negligible inductance L and 
negligible capacity C, no energy is stored, and a change in the 
circuit thus can be brought about instantly without any disturb- 
ance or intermediary transient condition. 

In a circuit containing only resistance and " capacity , as a 
static machine, or only resistance arid inductance, as a low or 
medium voltage power circuit, electric energy is stored essentially 
in one form only, and a change of the circuit, as an opening of 
the circuit, thus cannot be brought about instantly, but occurs 
more or less gradually, as the energy first has to be stored or 
discharged. 

In a circuit containing resistance, inductance, and capacity, 
and therefore capable of storing energy in two different forms, 
the mechanical change of circuit conditions, as the opening of a 
circuit, can be brought about instantly, the internal energy of 
the circuit adjusting itself to the changed circuit conditions by 
a transfer of energy between static and magnetic and inversely, 
that is, after the circuit conditions have been changed, a transient 
phenomenon, usually of oscillatory nature, occurs in the circuit 
by the readjustment of the stored energy. 

These transient phenomena of the readjustment of stored 
electric energy with a change of circuit conditions require careful 
study wherever the amount of stored energy is sufficiently large 
to cause serious damage. This is analogous to the phenomena 
of the readjustment of the stored energy of mechanical motion: 
while it may be harmless to instantly stop a slowly moving light 
carriage, the instant stoppage, as by collision, of a fast railway 
train leads to the usual disastrous result. So also, in electric 
systems of small stored energy, a sudden change of circuit con- 
ditions may be safe, while in a high-potential power system of 
very great stored electric energy any change of circuit conditions 
requiring a sudden change of energy is liable to be destructive. 


THE CONSTANTS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 15 

Where electric energy is stored in one form only, usually little 
danger exists, since the circuit protects itself against sudden 
change by the energy adjustment retarding the change, and 
only where energy is stored electrostatically and magnetically, 
the mechanical change of the circuit conditions, as the opening 
of the circuit, can be brought about instantly, and the stored 
energy then surges between electrostatic and magnetic energy. 

In the following, first the phenomena will be considered which 
result from the stored energy and its readjustment in circuits 
storing energy in one form only, which usually is as electro- 
magnetic energy, and then the general problem of a circuit 
storing energy electromagnetically and electrostatically will be 
considered.
