CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

1. Whenever in an electric circuit a sudden change of the 
circuit conditions is produced, a transient term appears in the 
circuit, that is, at the moment when the change begins, 
the circuit quantities, as current, voltage, magnetic flux, etc., cor- 
respond to the circuit conditions existing before the change, but 
do not, in general, correspond to the circuit conditions brought 
about by the change, and therefore must pass from the values 
corresponding to the previous condition to the values corre- 
sponding to the changed condition. This transient term may be 
a gradual approach to the final condition, or an approach by a 
series of oscillations of gradual decreasing intensities. 

Gradually — after indefinite time theoretically, after relatively 
short time practically — the transient term disappears, and 
permanent conditions of current, of voltage, of magnetism, etc., 
are established. The numerical values of current, of voltage, etc., 
in the permanent state reached after the change of circuit con- 
ditions, in general, are different from the values of current, 
voltage, etc., existing in the permanent state before the change, 
since they correspond to a changed condition of the circuit. 
They may, however, be the same, or such as can be considered 
the same, if the change which gives rise to the transient term 
can be considered as not changing the permanent circuit con- 
ditions. For instance, if the connection of one part of a circuit, 
with regard to the other part of the circuit, is reversed, a transient 
term is produced by this reversal, but the final or permanent 
condition after the reversal is the same as before, except that 
the current, voltage, etc., in the part of the circuit which has been 
reversed, are now in opposite direction. In this latter case, 
the same change can be produced again and again after equal 

217 


218 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

intervals of time t0, and thus the transient term made to recur 
periodically. The electric quantities i, e, etc., of the circuit, 
from time t = 0 to t = tQ, have the same values as from time 
t = t0 to t = 2 tof from t = 2 t0 to t = 3 tot etc., and it is sufficient 
to investigate one cycle, from t = 0 to t = t0. 

In this case, the starting values of the electrical quantities 
during each period are the end values of the preceding period, 
or, in other words, the terminal values at the moment of start 
of the transient term, t = 0, i = i0 and e = e0, are the same as 
the values at the end of the period t = t0, i = i' and e = e'\ 
that is, iQ = ± i' j e0 = ± e', etc. ; where, the plus sign applies 
for the unchanged, and the minus sign for the reversed part of the 
circuit. 

2. With such periodically recurrent changes of circuit con- 
ditions, the period of recurrence t0 may be so long, that the 
transient term produced by a change has died out, the permanent 
conditions reached, before the next change takes place. Or, 
at the moment where a change of circuit conditions starts, a 
transient term, the transient term due to the preceding change, 
has not yet disappeared, that is, the time, t0, of a period is shorter 
than the duration of the transient term. 

In the first case, the terminal or starting values, that is, the 
values at the moment when the change begins, are the same as 
the permanent values, and periodic recurrence has no effect on 
the character of the transient term, but the phenomenon is cal- 
culated as discussed in Section I, as single transient term, 
which gradually dies out. 

If, however, at the moment of change, the transient term of 
the preceding change has not yet vanished, then the starting or 
terminal values of the electric quantities, as i0 and e0, also contain 
a transient term, namely, that existing at the end of the preced- 
ing period. The same term then exists also at the end of the 
period, or at t = t0. Hence in this case, the terminal conditions 
are given, not as fixed numerical values, but as an equation 
between the electric quantities at time t = 0 and at time t = t0; 
or, at the beginning and at the end of the period, and the inte- 
gration constants, thus, are calculated from this equation. 

3. In general, the permanent values of electric quantities 
after a change are not the same as before, and therefore at least 
two changes are required before the initial condition of the 


INTRODUCTION 219 

circuit is restored, and the cycle can be repeated. Periodically 
recurring transient phenomena, thus usually consist of two or 
more successive changes, at the end of which the original con- 
dition of the circuit is reproduced, and therefore the series of 
changes can be repeated. For instance, increasing the resistance 
of a circuit brings about a change. Decreasing this resistance 
again to its original value brings about a second change, which 
restores the condition existing before the first change, and thus 
completes the cycle. In this case, then, the starting values of 
the electric quantities during the first part of the period equal 
the end values during the second part of the period, and the 
starting values of the second part of the period equal the end 
values of the first part of the period. That is, if a resistor is 
inserted at time t = 0, short circuited at time t = t1} and inserted 
again at time t = t0, and e and i are voltage and current respec- 
tively during the first, e1 and il during the second part of the 
period, we have 

/e/t,Q = A!/^; A,/,=<1 - /e/t=k, 
and 

AA=o = AiA-ioJ Ai/«=«, = AA=«i- 

If during the times ^ and t0 - tt the transient terms have 
already vanished, and permanent conditions established, so that 
the transient terms of each part of the period depend only upon 
the permanent values during the other part of the period, the 
length of time tl and t0 has no effect on the transient term, that 
is, each change of circuit conditions takes place and is calculated 
independently of the other change, or the periodic recurrence. 
A number of such cases have been discussed in Section I, as 
for instance, the effect of cutting a resistor in and out of a 
divided inductive circuit, paragraph 75, Fig. 33. In this case, 
four successive changes are made before the cycle recurs: a 
resistor is cut in, in two steps, and cut out again in two 
steps, but at each change, sufficient time elapses to reach 
practically permanent condition. 

In general, and especially in those cases of periodic transient 
phenomena, which are of engineering importance, successive 
changes occur before the permanent condition is reached, or 
even approximated after the preceding change, so that frequently 


220 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

the values of the electric quantities are very different throughout 
the whole cycle from the permanent values which they would 
gradually assume; that is, the transient term preponderates 
in the values of current, voltage, etc., and the permanent term 
occasionally is very small compared with the transient term. 

4. Periodic transient phenomena are of engineering impor- 
tance mainly in three cases: (1) in the control of electric circuits; 
(2) in the production of high frequency currents, and (3) in the 
rectification of alternating currents. 

1. In controlling electric circuits, etc., by some operating 
mechanism, as a potential magnet increasing and decreasing the 
resistance of the circuit, or a clutch shifting brushes, etc., the 
main objections are due to the excess of the friction of rest over 
the friction while moving. This results in a lack of sensitiveness, 
and an overreaching of the controlling device. To overcome 
the friction of rest, the deviation of the circuit from normal 
must become greater than necessary to maintain the motion of 
the operating mechanism,, and when once started, the mechanism 
overreaches. This objection is eliminated by never allowing 
the operating mechanism to come to rest, but arranging it in 
unstable equilibrium, as a " floating system," so that the con- 
dition of the circuit is never normal, but continuously and 
periodically varies between the two extremes, and the resultant 
effect is the average of the transient terms, which rapidly and 
periodically succeed each other. By changing the relative 
duration of the successive transient terms, any resultant inter- 
mediary between the two extremes can thus be produced. On 
this principle, for instance, operated the controlling solenoid of 
the Thomson-Houston arc machine, and also numerous auto- 
matic potential regulators. 

2. Production of high frequency oscillating currents by period- 
ically recurring condenser discharges has been discussed under 
" oscillating current generator," in Section I, paragraph 44. 

Non-sinusoidal high frequency alternating currents are pro- 
duced by an arc, when made unstable by shunting it with a 
condenser, as discussed before. 

The Ruhmkorff coil or inductorium also represents an appli- 
cation of periodically recurring transient phenomena, as also 
does Prof. E. Thomson's dynamostatic machine. 

3. By reversing the connections between a source of alter- 


INTRODUCTION 221 

nating voltage and the receiver circuit, synchronously with the 
alternations of the voltage, the current in the receiver circuit is 
made unidirectional (though more or less pulsating) and there- 
fore rectified. 

In rectifying alternating voltages, either both half waves of 
voltage can be taken from the same source, as the same trans- 
former coil, and by synchronous reversal of connections sent in 
the same direction into the receiver circuit, or two sources of 
voltage, as the two secondary coils of a transformer, may be 
used, and the one half wave taken from the one source, and sent 
into the receiver circuit, the other half wave taken from the 
other source, and sent into the receiver circuit in the same 
direction as the first half wave. The latter arrangement has 
the disadvantage of using the alternating current supply source 
less economically, but has the advantage that no reversal, but 
only an opening and closing of connections, is required, and is 
therefore the method commonly applied in stationary rectify- 
ing apparatus. 

6. In rectifying alternating voltages, the change of connec- 
tions between the alternating supply and the unidirectional 
receiving circuit can be carried out as outlined below : 

(a) By a synchronously moving commutator or contact 
maker, in mechanical rectification. Such mechanical rectifiers 
may again be divided, by the character of the alternating supply 
voltage, into single phase, quarter phase and three phase, and 
by the character of the electric circuit, into constant potential 
and constant current rectifiers. Mechanical rectification by a 
commutator driven by a separate synchronous motor has not yet 
found any industrial application. Rectification by a commuta- 
tor driven by the generator of the alternating voltage has found 
very extended and important industrial use in the excitation of 
the field, or a part of the field (the series field) of alternators and 
synchronous motors, and especially in the constant-current arc 
machine. The Brush arc machine is a quarter-phase alternator 
connected to a rectifying commutator on the armature shaft, 
and the Thomson-Houston arc machine is a star-connected 
three-phase alternator connected to a rectifying commutator on 
the armature shaft. The reason for using rectification in these 
machines, which are intended to produce constant direct current 
at very high voltage, is that the ordinary commutator of the 


222 TRANSIENT PHENOMENA 

continuous-current machine cannot safely commutate, even at 
limited current, more than 30 to 50 volts per commutator 
segment, while the rectifying commutator of the constant- 
current arc machine can control from 2000 to 3000 volts per 
segment, and therefore rectification is superior to commutation 
for very high voltages at limited current, as explained by the 
character of this phenomenon, discussed in Chapter III. 

(b) The synchronous change of circuit connection required 
by the rectification of alternating e.m.fs. can be brought about 
without any mechanical motion in so-called "arc rectifiers," 
by the characteristic properties of the electric arc, to be a good 
conductor in one, an insulator in the opposite direction. By 
thus inserting an arc in the path of the alternating circuit, 
current can exist and thus a circuit be established for that half 
wave of alternating voltage, which sends the current in the 
same direction as the current in the arc, while for the reversed 
half wave of voltage the arc acts as open circuit. As seen, the 
arc cannot reverse, but only open and close the circuit, and so 
can rectify only one half wave, that is, two separate sources of 
alternating voltage, or two rectifiers with the same source of 
voltage, are required to rectify both half waves of alternating 
voltage. 

(c) Some electrolytic cells, as those containing aluminum as 
one terminal, offer a low resistance to the passage of current in 
one direction, but a very high resistance, or practically interrupt 
the current, in opposite direction, due to the formation of a non- 
conducting film on the aluminum, when it is the positive terminal. 
Such electrolytic cells can therefore be used for rectification in 
a similar manner as arcs. 

The three main classes of rectifiers thus are: (a) mechanical 
rectifiers; (b) arc rectifiers; (c) electrolytic rectifiers. 

Still other methods of rectification, as by the unidirectional 
character of vacuum discharges, of the conduction in some 
crystals, etc., are not yet of industrial importance.
