CHAPTER VI. 

TOPOGRAPHIC METHOD. 

33. In the representation of alternating sine waves by 
vectors in a polar diagram, a certain ambiguity exists, in so 
far as one and the same quantity — an E.M.F., for in- 
stance — can be represented by two vectors of opposite 
direction, according as to whether the E.M.F. is considered 
as a part of the impressed E.M.F., or as a counter E.M.F. 
This is analogous to the distinction between action and 
reaction in mechanics. 


Further, it is obvious that if in the circuit of a gener- 
ator, G (Fig. 25), the current flowing from terminal A over 
resistance R to terminal B, is represented by a vector OI 
(Fig. 26), or by /= i -\-ji', the same current can be con- 
sidered as flowing in the opposite direction, from terminal 
B to terminal A in opposite phase, and therefore represented 
by a vector OI-± (Fig. 26), or by 7l = — i —ji'> 

Or, if the difference of potential from terminal B to 
terminal A is denoted by the E = e + je' , the difference 
of potential from A to B is El = — e — je' . 


44 


ALTERNA TING-CURRENT PHENOMENA. 


Hence, in dealing with alternating-current sine waves, 
it is necessary to consider them in their proper direction 
with regard to the circuit. Especially in more complicated 
circuits, as interlinked polyphase systems, careful attention 
has to be paid to this point. 


-*' 

Fig. 28. 

34. Let, for instance, in Fig. 27, an interlinked three- 
phase system be represented diagrammatically, as consist- 
ing of three E.M.Fs., of equal intensity, differing in phase 
by one-third of a period. Let the E.M.Fs. in the direction 


Fig. 27 


from the common connection O of the three branch circuits 
to the terminals A19 A2,AB, be represented by Elt E2, £3. 
Then the difference of potential from A2 to A± is £z — £lf 


since the two E.M.Fs., El and 


are connected in cir- 


cuit between the terminals A, and A*, in the direction, 


TOPOGRAPHIC METHOD. 45 

Al — O — A2; that is, the one, Ez, in the direction OA2, 
from the common connection to terminal, the other, JS1, in 
the opposite direction, A^O, from the terminal to common 
connection, and represented by — El. Conversely, the dif- 
ference of potential from A1 to Az is El — Ez. 

It is then convenient to go still a step farther, and 
drop, in the diagrammatic representation, the vector line 
altogether ; that is, denote the sine wave by a point only,, 
the end of the corresponding vector. 

" Looking at this from a different point of view, it means 
that we choose one point of the system — for instance, the 
common connection O — as a zero point, or point of zero 
potential, and represent the potentials of all the other points 
of the circuit by points in the diagram, such that their dis- 
tances from the zero point gives the intensity ; their ampli- 
tude the phase of the difference of potential of the respective 
point with regard to the zero point ; and their distance and 
amplitude with regard to other points of the diagram, their 
difference of potential from these points in intensity and 
phase. 


Fig. 28. 

Thus, for example, in an interlinked three-phase system 
with three E.M.Fs. of equal intensity, and differing in phase 
by one-third of a period, we may choose the common con- 
nection of the star-connected generator as the zero point, 
and represent, in Fig. 28, one of the E.M.Fs., or the poten- 


46 


AL TERN A TING-CURRENT PHENOMEMA. 


tial at one of the three-phase terminals, by point Er The 
potentials at the two other terminals will then be given by 
the points Ez and E& which have the same distance from 
O as Ev and are equidistant from E± and from each other. 
The difference of potential between any pair of termi- 
nals — for instance E^ and E2 — is then the distance EZEV 
or E±EV according to the direction considered. 

35. If now the three branches OEV ~OEZ and "OEW of 
the three-phase system are loaded equally by three currents 
equal in intensity and in difference of phase against their 


THUEE-PHA8E 8V8TEM 
48° LAO 


BALANCED THREE-PHASE SYSTEM 

NON-INDUCTIVE LOAD 
E° 


Fig. 29. 


E.M.Fs., these currents are represented in Fig. 29 by the 
vectors 07^ = 072 = Ofs = I, lagging behind the E.M.Fs. 
by angles E.O^ = EZOIZ = EZOI& = Q. 

Let the three-phase circuit be supplied over a line of 
impedance Z± = r^ —jx\ from a generator of internal im- 
pedance Z0 = x0 -jx0. 

In phase OEV the E.M.F. consumed by resistance r^ is 
represented by the distance E^EJ = Irv in phase, that is 
parallel with current OIV The E.M.F. consumed by re- 
actance #! is represented by E^Ej' = Ixv 90° ahead of cur- 


TOPOGRAPHIC METHOD. 


47 


rent OIr The same applies to the other two phases, and 
it thus follows that to produce the E.M.F. triangle E^E^E^ 
at the terminals of the consumer's circuit, the E.M.F. tri- 
angle E^E^E? is required at the generator terminals. 

Repeating the same operation for the internal impedance 
of the generator we get E"E'" = Iroi and parallel to OIV 
E'"E° = Ixoy and 90° ahead of ~OTV and thus as triangle of 
(nominal) induced E.M.Fs. of the generator E°E£E°. 

In Fig. 29, the diagram is shown for 45° lag, in Fig. 30 
for noninductive load, and in Fig. 31 for 45° lead of the 
currents with regard to their E.M.Fs. 


BALANCED THREE 
-PHASE SYSTEM 

45° LEAD 


THREE-PHASE CIRCUIT 

80°LA» 

TRANSMISSION LINE' 

WITH DISTRIBUTED 

CAPACITY, INDUCTANCB 

RESISTANCE AUD LEAKAQB 

•I, 


Fig. 31. 


Fig. 32. 


As seen, the induced generator E.M.F. and thus the 
generator excitation with lagging current must be higher, 
with leading current lower, than at non-inductive load, or 
conversely with the same generator excitation, that is the 
same induced generator E.M.F. triangle E°E£E°, the 
E.M.Fs. at the receiver's circuit, Ev Ez, E9 fall off more 
with lagging, less with leading current, than with non- 
inductive load. 

36. As further instance may be considered the case of 
a single phase alternating current circuit supplied over a 
cable containing resistance and distributed capacity. 


48 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA. 

Let in Fig. 33 the potential midway between the two 
terminals be assumed as zero point 0. The two terminal 
voltages at the receiver circuit are then represented by the 
points E and El equidistant from 0 and opposite each other, 
and the two currents issuing from the terminals are rep- 
resented by the points / and I1, equidistant from 0 and 
opposite each other, and under angle & with E and El 
respectively. 

Considering first an element of the line or cable next to 
the receiver circuit. In this an E.M.F. EEl is consumed 
by the resistance of the line element, in phase with the 
current OI, and proportional thereto, and a current //x con- 
sumed by the capacity, as charging current of the line 
element, 90° ahead in phase of the E.M.F. OE and propor- 
tional thereto, so that at the generator end of this cable 
element current and E.M.F. are OI^ and OEl respectively. 

Passing now to the next cable element we have again an 
E.M.F. E1EZ proportional to and in phase with the current 
OI^ and a current IJZ proportional to and 90° ahead of the 
E.M.F. OEV and thus passing from element to element 
along the cable to the generator, we get curves of E.M.Fs. 
e and e1, and curves of currents i and il, which can be called 
the topographical circuit characteristics, and which corre- 
spond to each other, point for point, until the generator 
terminal voltages OE0 and OE0l and the generator currents 
OI0 and OIJ are reached. 

Again, adding 'E~Er' = I0r0 and parallel OI0 and E"E° = 
I0x0 and 90° ahead of ~OIM gives the (nominal) induced 
E.M.F. of the generator OE°, where Z0 = r0 — jx0 = inter- 
nal impedance of the generator. 

In Fig. 33 is shown the circuit characteristics for 60° 
lag, of a cable containing only resistance and capacity. 

Obviously by graphical construction the circuit character- 
istics appear more or less as broken lines, due to the neces- 
sity of using finite line elements, while in reality when 
calculated by the differential method they are smooth curves. 


TOPOGRAPHIC METHOD. 


49 


37. As further instance may be considered a three-phase 
circuit supplied over a long distance transmission line of 
distributed capacity, self-induction, resistance, and leakage. 

Let, in Fig. 38, O£v ~OEy ~OEZ = three-phase E.M.Fs. 
at receiver circuit, equidistant from each other and = E. 

Let OIV Oly Of3 = three-phase currents in the receiver 
circuit equidistant from each other and = /, and making 
with E the phase angle <3. 

Considering again as in § 35 the transmission line ele- 
ment by element, we have in every element an E.M.F. 
consumed by the resistance in phase with the current 
n^ proportional thereto, and an E.M.F. E^, Ef con- 


sumed by the reactance of the line element, 90° ahead of 
the current OIV and proportional thereto. 

In the same line element we have a current IJ^ in phase 
with the E.M.F. OEV and proportional thereto, representing 
the loss of energy current by leakage, dielectric hysteresis, 
etc., and a current ^V/', 90° ahead of the E.M.F. OEV and 
proportional thereto, the charging current of the line ele- 
ment as condenser, and in this manner passing along the 
line, element by element, we ultimately reach the generator 
terminal voltages E°, E°, Es°, and generator currents //, 
/2°, 78°, over the topographical characteristics of E.M.F. ev 
ev es, and of current iv z'2, z'3, as shown in Fig. 33. 

The circuit characteristics of current i and of E.M.F. e 


50 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA. 


correspond to each other, point for point, the one giving the 
current and the other the E.M.F. in the line element. 


TRANSMISSION 

WITH DISTRIBUTED 

CAPACITY, INDUCTANCE 

RESISTANCE AND LEAKAGE 
90° LAO 


Fig. 34. 

Only the circuit characteristics of the first phase are 
shown as ^ and z'r As seen, passing from the receiving 
end towards the generator end of the line, potential and 


TRANSMISSION LINE 

WITH DISTRIBUTED CAPACITY, INDUCTANCE 
RESISTANCE AND LEAKAGE 


Fig. 35. 


current alternately rise and fall, while their phase angle 
changes periodically between lag and lead. 


TOPOGRAPHIC METHOD. 51 

37. a. More markedly this is shown in Fig. 34, the topo- 
graphic circuit characteristic of one of the lines with 90° 
lag in the receiver circuit. Corresponding points of the 
two characteristics e and i are marked by corresponding 
figures 0 to 16, representing equidistant points of the line. 
The values of E.M.F., current and their difference of phase 
are plotted in Fig. 35 in rectangular co-ordinates with the 
distance as abscissae, counting from the receiving circuit 
towards the generator. As seen from Fig. 35, E.M.F. and 
current periodically but alternately rise and fall, a maximum 
of one approximately coinciding with a minimum of the 
other and with a point of zero phase displacement. 

The phase angle between current and E.M.F. changes 
from 90° lag to 72° lead, 44° lag, 34° lead, etc., gradually 
decreasing in the amplitude of its variation. 


52 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA.
