CHAPTER XXIII 

REVIEW 

263. In reviewing the numerous types of apparatus, methods 
of construction and of operation, discussed in the preceding, 
an alphabetical list of them is given in the following, comprising 
name, definition, principal characteristics, advantages and dis- 
advantages, and the paragraph in which they are discussed. 

Alexanderson High-frequency Inductor Alternator. — 159. 
Comprises an inductor disk of very many teeth, revolving at very 
high speed between two radial armatures. Used for producing 
very high frequencies, from 20,000 to 200,000 cycles per second. 

Amortisseur. — Squirrel-cage winding in the pole faces of the 
synchronous machine, proposed by Leblanc to oppose the hunt- 
ing tendency, and extensively used. 

Amplifier. — 161. An apparatus to intensify telephone and 
radio telephone currents. High-frequency inductor alternator 
excited by the telephone current, usually by armature reaction 
through capacity. The generated current is then rectified, be- 
fore transmission in long-distance telephony, after transmission 
in radio telephony. 

Arc Machines. — 138. Constant-current generators, usually 
direct-current, with rectifying commutators. The last and most 
extensively used arc machines were: 

Brush Arc Machine. — 141-144. A quarter-phase constant- 
current alternator with rectifying commutators. 

Thomson-Houston Arc Machine. — 141-144. A three-phase 
F-connected constant-current alternator with rectifying commu- 
tator. 

The development of alternating-current series arc lighting by 
constant-current transformers greatly reduced the importance 
of the arc machine, and when in the magnetite lamp arc 
lighting returned to direct current, the development of the 
mercury-arc rectifier superseded the arc machine. 

Asynchronous Motor. — Name used for all those types of 
alternating-current (single-phase or polyphase) motors or motor 
couples, which approach a definite synchronous speed at no-load, 
and slip below this speed with increasing load. 

459 


400 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Brush Arc Machine. — (Sec1 "Are Machines.'1} 
Compound Alternator. — 138. Alternator with rectifying com- 
mutator, connected in Beriea to the armature, either con- 
ductive!}-, or inductively through transformer, and exciting a 
scries field winding by the rectified current. The limitation of 
l he power, which can be rectified, and the need of readjusting the 
brushes with a change of the inductivity of the load, hasmade njGfl 
compounding unsuitahie for the modern high-power altcrnu- 

ton. 

Condenser Motor. — 77. Single-phase induction motor with 
condenser in tertiary circuit on stator, for producing shirting 
torque and high power-factor. The space angle between pri- 
mary and tertiary stator circuit usually is 45° to 60°, and often a 
three-phase motor is used, with single-phase supply on one phase. 
and condenser on a Becond phase. With the small amount of 
capacity, sufficient for power-factor compensation, usually the 
starting torque is small, unless a starting resistance is used, Imi 
the torque efficiency is high. 

Concatenation. — III, 28. Chain connection, tandem connec- 
tion, cascade connection. Is the connection o the secondary nl 
an induction machine with a second machine. The Bttt&d 
machine may be: 

1. An Induction Machine. — The couple then is asynchronous. 
Hereto belong: 

The induction frequency converter or genera] aUernai\ 
transformer, XII, 103. It transforms between alternating-ear- 
rent systems of different frequency, and has over the indoetiOB- 
motor generator set the advantage of higher efficiency and lesser 
capacity, but the disadvantage of not being standard. 

The' concatenated couple of induction motors, 9, 28, 111. It 
permits multispeed operation. It has the disadvantage against 
the multispeed motor, that, two motors are required; but where 
two or more motors are used, as in induction-motor railroading, 
it has the advantage of greater simplicity. 

The internally concatenated motor {Hunt mtttt>r), 36. I' H 
more efficient than the concatenated couple or the multispeed 
motor, but limited in design to certain speeds and speed ratios. 

2. A Synchronous Machine. — The couple then is synchronous. 
Hereto belong: 

The synchronous frequency converter, XII, 103. It has a defi- 
nite frequency ratio, while that of the induction frequi 


REVIEW 461 

verter slightly changes with the load, by the slip of the induction 
machine. 

Induction Motor with Low-frequency Synchronous Exciter. — 47. 
The synchronous exciter in this case is of small capacity, and 
gives speed control and power-factor compensation. 

I nductionGenerator with Low-frequency Exciter. — 110, 121. Syn- 
chronous induction generator. Stanley induction generator. In 
this case, the low-frequency exciter may be a synchronous or a 
commutating machine or any other source of low frequency. 
The phase rotation of the exciter may be in the reverse direc- 
tion of the main machine, or in the same direction. In the first 
case, the couple may be considered as a frequency converter 
driven backward at many times synchronous speed, the exciter 
is motor, and the generated frequency less than the speed. In 
the case of the same phase rotation of exciter and main machine, 
the generated frequency is higher than the speed, and the 
exciter also is generator. This synchronous induction generator 
has peculiar regulation characteristics, as the armature reaction 
of non-inductive load is absent. 

3. A Synchronous Commutating Machine. — 112. The couple 
is synchronous, and called motor converter. It has the advantage 
of lower frequency commutation, and permits phase control by 
the internal reactance of the induction machine. It has higher 
efficiency and smaller size than a motor-generator set, but is 
larger and less efficient than the synchronous converter, and 
therefore has not been able to compete with the latter. 

4. A direct-current commutating machine, as exciter, 41. This 
converts the induction machine into a synchronous machine 
(Danielson motor). A good induction motor gives a poor syn- 
chronous motor, but a bad induction motor, of very low power- 
factor, gives a good synchronous motor, of good power-factor, 
etc. 

5. An alternating-current commutating machine, as low-fre- 
quency exciter, 52. The couple then is asynchronous. This 
permits a wide range of power-factor and speed control as motor. 
As generator it is one form of the Stanley induction generator 
discussed under (2). 

6. A Condenser. — This permits power-factor compensation, 
55, and speed control, 11. The power-factor compensation 
gives good values with very bad induction motors, of low power- 
factor, but is uneconomical with good motors. Speed control 


4(52 


ELECTRICAL APPARA TUS 


usually requires excessive amounts of capacity, and given rather 
poor constants. The machine is asynchronous. 

Danielson Motor. — 11. An induction motor converted to a 
synchronous motor by direct-current excitation. (8ee "COB- 
catenation (4).") 

Deep-bar Induction Motor. — 7. Induction motor with deep 
and narrow rotor bars. At the low frequency near synchronism, 
the secondary current traverses the entire rotor conductor, and 
the secondary resistance thus is low. At high slips, u 
ing, unequal current distribution in the rotor bars concentrates 
the current in the top of the bars, thus gives a greatly increased 
effective resistance, and thereby higher torque. However, the 
high reactance of the deep bar somewhat impairs the power- 
factor. The effect is very closely the same as in the double 
squirrel cage. (See "Double Squirrel-cage Induction Motor. "I 

Double Squirrel-cage Induction Motor.— II, 18. Induction 
motor having a high-resistance low-reactance squirrel cage, plan 
to the rotor surface, and a low-resistance high-reactance squirrel 
cage, embedded in the core. The latter gives torque at good 
speed regulation near synchronism, but carries little current at 
lower speeds, due to itst high reactance. The surface squirrel 
cage gives high torque and good torque efficiency at Ion SpMdfl 
and standstill, due to its high resistance, but little torque near 
synchronism. The combination thus gives a uniformly high 
torque over a wide speed range, but at some sacrifice of power- 
factor, due to the high reactance of the lower squirrel i 
get close speed regulation near synchronism, together with high 
torque over a very wide speed range, for instance, down to full 
speed in reverse direction (motor brake), a triple sgt 
may be used, one high resistance low reactance, one medium 
resistance and reactance, and one very low resistance and high 
reactance (24). 

Double Synchronous Machine. — 110, 119. An induction ma- 
chine, in which the rotor, running at double synchronism, is 
connected with the stator, either in series or in parallel, but with 
reverse phase rotation of the rotor, so that the two rotating fields 
coincide and drop into step at double synchronism. The machine 
requires a supply of lagging current for excitation, just tike ;itr. 
induction machine. It may be used as synchronous induction 
generator, or as synchronous motor. As generator, the armature 
reaction neutralizes at non-inductive, but not at inductive load, 


REVIEW 463 

and thus gives peculiar regulation characteristics, similar as the 
Stanley induction generator. It has been proposed for steam- 
turbine alternators, as it would permit higher turbine speed 
(3000 revolutions at 25 cycles) but has not yet been used. As 
motor it has the disadvantage that it is not self-starting. 

Eickemeyer Inductively Compensated Single-phase Series 
Motor. — 193. Single-phase commutating machine with series 
field and inductive compensating winding. 

Eickemeyer Inductor Alternator. — 160. Inductor alternator 
with field coils parallel to shaft, so that the magnetic flux disposi- 
tion is that of a bipolar or multipolar machine, in which the 
multitooth inductor takes the place of the armature of the stand- 
ard machine. Voltage induction then takes place in armature 
coils in the pole faces, and the magnetic flux in the inductor re- 
verses, with a frequency much lower than that of the induced 
voltage. This type of inductor machine is specially adopted for 
moderately high frequencies, 300 to 2000 cycles, and used in in- 
ductor alternators and inductor converters. In the latter, the in- 
ductor carries a low-frequency closed circuit armature winding 
connected to a commutator to receive direct current as motor. 

Eickemeyer Rotary Terminal Induction Motor. — XI, 101. 
Single-phase induction motor with closed circuit primary winding 
connected to commutator. The brushes leading the supply cur- 
rent into the commutator stand still at full speed, but revolve 
at lower speeds and in starting. This machine can give full maxi- 
mum torque at any speed down to standstill, depending on the 
speed of the brushes, but its disadvantage is sparking at the com- 
mutator, which requires special consideration. 

Frequency Converter or General Alternating-current Trans- 
former.— XII, 103. Transforms a polyphase system into another 
polyphase system of different frequency and where desired of differ 
ent voltage and different number of phases. Consists of an induc- 
tion machine concatenated to a second machine, which may be 
an induction machine or a synchronous machine, thus giving the 
induction frequency converter and the synchronous frequency con- 
verter. (See "Concatenation.") In the synchronous frequency 
converter the frequency ratio is rigidly constant, in the induction 
frequency converter it varies slightly with the load, by the slip 
of the induction machine. When increasing the frequency, the 
second machine is motor, when decreasing the frequency, it is 
generator. Above synchronism, both machines are generators 


I(>l 


ELECTRICAL Al'l'AHA Tl S 


and the machine thus a synchronous induction generator. En 
concatenation, the first machine always nets an Frequency con- 
verter. The frequency converter has the advantage "I [MM 
machine capacity than the motor generator, but the disadvantage 
of not being standard yet. 

Heyland Motor. — 59, 210. Squirrel-cage induction motor with 
commutator for power-factor compensation. 

Hunt Motor. — 30. Internally concatenated induction motor. 
(See "Concatenation (l).") 

Hysteresis Motor. — X, 98. Motor with polyphase stain ud 
laminated rotor of uniform reluctance in all directions, without 
winding. Gives constant torque at all speeds, by the hystereBM 
of the rotor, as motor below and as generatoi above HynchroDBSB, 
while at synchronism it may be either. Poor power-factor and 
small output make it feasible only in very small BU6S, BUCt H 
motor meters. 

Inductor Machines. — XVII, 150. Synchronous machine, gen- 
erator or motor, in which field and armature coils stand still ami 
the magnetic field flux is constant, and the voltage is induced b) 
changing the flux path, that is, admitting and withdrawing the 
flux from the armature coils by means of a revolving inductor. 
The inducing Hux in the armature coils thus does not alternate, 
but pulsates without reversal. For standard freqiirnrM-. tin- 
inductor machine is less economical and little used, but it offers 

great constructive advantages at high frequencies and is ll nlv 

feasible type at extremely high frequencies. Excited by alter- 
naling currents, the inductor machine may be Used U amplilic: 
(see "Amplifier"); excited by polyphase currents, ii a 
(ton inductor frequency converter, 102; with a direct-current wind- 
ing on the inductor, it is a direct-current kigh-frequi <>> . 
(See "Eickemeyer Inductor Alternator.") 

Leading current, power-factor compensation and phase eontn I 
can be produced by: 

Condenser. 

Polarisation cell. 

Overexcited synchronous motor or synchronous col 

Induction machine concatenated to condenser, to sj I 
motor or to low-frequency commutating machine. 

Alternating-current commutating machine with lagging field 
excitation. 

Leblanc'sPanchahuteur. — 145. Synchronous rectifier of many 


REVIEW 465 

phases, fed by polyphase transformer increasing the number of 
phases, and driven by a synchronous motor having as many cir- 
cuits as the rectifier has phases, each synchronous motor circuit 
being connected in shunt to the corresponding rectifier phase to 
byepass the differential current and thereby reduce inductive 
sparking. Can rectify materially more power than the standard 
rectifier, but is inferior to the converter. 

Magneto Commutation. — 163. Apparatus in which the induc- 
tion is varied, with stationary inducing (exciting) and induced 
coils, by shifting or reversing the magnetic flux path by means 
of a movable part of the magnetic circuit, the inductor. Applied 
to stationary induction apparatus, as voltage regulators, and to 
synchronous machines, as inductor alternator. 

Monocyclic. — 127. A system of polyphase voltages with essen- 
tially single-phase flow of power. A system of polyphase vol- 
tages, in which one phase regulates for constant voltage, that is, 
a voltage which does not materially drop within the range of 
power considered, while the voltage in quadrature phase thereto 
is of limited power, that is, rapidly drops with increase of load. 
Monocyclic systems, as the square or the triangle, are derived 
from single-phase supply by limited energy storage in inductance 
or capacity, and used in those cases, as single-phase induction 
motor starting, where the use of a phase converter would be 
uneconomical. 

Motor Converter. — 112. An induction machine concatenated 
with a synchronous commutating machine. (See " Concatenation 
(3).") The latter thus receives part of the power mechanically, 
part electrically, at lower frequency, and thereby offers the ad- 
vantages incident to a lower frequency in a commutating machine. 
It permits phase control by the internal reactance of the induc- 
tion machine. Smaller than a motor-generator set, but larger 
than a synchronous converter, and the latter therefore preferable 
where it can be used. 

Multiple Squirrel-cage Induction Motor. — (See " Double 
Squirrel-cage Induction Motor.") 

Multispeed Induction Motor. — 14. Polyphase Induction 
Motor with the primary windings arranged so that by the opera- 
tion of a switch, the number of poles of the motor, and thereby 
its speed can be changed. It is the most convenient method of 
producing several economical speeds in an induction motor, and 
therefore is extensively used. At the lower speed, the power- 
factor necessarily is lower. 

30 


466 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

Permutator. — 146. Machine to convert polyphase alternating 
to direct current, consisting of a stationary polyphase tean.-- 
former with many secondary phases connected to a stationary 
commutator, with a set of revolving brushes driven by a syn- 
chronous motor. Thus essentially a synchronous converter 
with stationary armature and revolving field, but with two 
armature windings, primary and secondary. The tofMCTl 
objection is the use of revolving brushes, which do not permit 
individual observation and adjustment during operation, and 
thus are liable to sparking. 

Phase Balancer.— 134. An apparatus producing a. polyphase 
system of opposite phase rotation for insertion in series to I 
polyphase system, to restore the voltage balance disturbed by a 
single-phase load. It may be: 

A stationary induction-phase balancer, consisting of an induc- 
tion regulator with reversed phase rotation of the series winding. 

A synchronous-phase balancer, consisting of a synchronous 
machine of reversed phase rotation, having two sets of field wind- 
ings in quadrature. By varying, or reversing the excitation of the 
latter, any phase relation of the balancer voltage with those of 
the main polyphase system can be produced. The synchronous 
phase balancer is mainly used, connected into the neutral of n 
synchronous phase converter, to control the latter so as to make 
the latter balance the load and voltage of a polypoM 
with considerable single-phase load, such as that of a single- 
phase railway system. 

Polyphase Commutator Motor. — Such motors may be shunt, 
181, or series type, 187, for mtiltispeed, adjustable-speed and 
varying-speed service. In commutation, they tend to be inferior 
to single-phase commutator motors, as their rotating field does 
not leave any neutral direction, in which a commutating field 
could be produced, such as is used in single-phase oommotttw 
motors. Therefore, polyphase commutator motors have been 
built with separate phases and neutral spaces between the phases, 
for commutating fields: Scherbius motor.. 

Reaction Machines. — XVI, 147. .Synchronous machine, motor 
or generator, in which the voltage is induced by pulsation of the 
magnetic reluctance, that is, by make and break of the magnetic 
circuit. It thus differs from the inductor machine, in that in 
the latter the total field flux is constant, but is shifted with re- 
gards to the armature coils, while in the reaction machine the 


REVIEW 467 

total field flux pulsates. The reaction machine has low output 
and low power-factor, but the type is useful in small synchronous 
motors, due to the simplicity resulting from the absence of direct- 
current field excitation. 

Rectifiers. — XV, 138. Apparatus to convert alternating into 
direct current by synchronously changing connections. Rec- 
tification may occur either by synchronously reversing connec- 
tions between alternating-current and direct-current circuit: 
reversing rectifier, or by alternately making contact between the 
direct-current circuit and the alternating-current circuit, when 
the latter is of the right direction, and opening contact, when 
of the reverse direction: contact-making rectifier. Mechanical 
rectifiers may be of either type. Arc rectifiers, such as the mer- 
cury-arc rectifier, which use the unidirectional conduction of the 
arc, necessarily are contact-making rectifiers. 

Full-wave rectifiers are those in which the direct-current cir- 
cuit receives both half waves of alternating current; half -wave 
rectifiers those in which only alternate half waves are rectified, 
the intermediate or reverse half waves suppressed. The latter 
type is permissible only in small sizes, as the interrupted pul- 
sating current traverses both circuits, and produces in the alter- 
nating-current circuit a unidirectional magnetization, which 
may give excessive losses and heating in induction apparatus. 
The foremost objection to the mechanical rectifier is, that the 
power which can be rectified without injurious inductive spark- 
ing, is limited, especially in single-phase rectifiers, but for small 
amounts of power, as for battery charging and constant-current 
arc lighting they are useful. However, even there the arc recti- 
fier is usually preferable. The brush arc machine and the 
Thomson Houston arc machine were polyphase alternators with 
rectifying commutators. 

Regulating Pole Converter. — Variable-ratio converter. Split- 
pole converter, XXI, 230. A synchronous converter, in which 
the ratio between direct-current voltage and alternating-current 
voltage can be varied at will, over a considerable range, by shift- 
ing the direction of the resultant magnetic field flux so that the 
voltage between the commutator brushes is less than maximum 
alternating-current voltage, and by changing, at constant im- 
pressed effective alternating voltage, the maximum alternating- 
current voltage and with it the direct-current voltage, by the 
superposition of a third harmonic produced in the converter in 


468 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

such a manner, that this harmonic exists only in the local COB- 
verier circuit. This is done by separating the field pole into 
two parts, a larger main pole, which has constant excitation, 
anil a smaller regulating pole, in which the excitation is varied 

and reversed. A resultant armature reaction exists in the 
regulating pole converter, proportional to the deviation of the 
voltage ratio from standard, and requires the use of a series Beld 
Regulating pole converters are extensively used for adjltataHo 
voltage service, as direct-current distribution, storaja 
charging, etc., due to their simplicity and wide voltage range at 
practically unity power-factor, white for automatic pottage 
control under fluctuating load, as railway service, phase control 
of the standard converter is usually preferred. 

Repulsion Generator. — 217. Repulsion motor operated 
generator. 

Repulsion Motor.— 194, 208, 214. Single-phase commutator 
motor in which the armature is short-circuited and energised 
fay induction from a stationary con pensa ting winding as primary. 
Usually of varying speed or series characteristic. Gives betta 
commutation than the series motor at moderate speeds, 

Rotary Terminal Single-phase Induction Motor.— XI, 101 
(See "Eickemeyer Rotary Terminal Induction Motor.") 

Shading Coil. — 73. A short-circuited turn surrounding i part 
of the pole face of a single-phase induction motor with definite 
poles, for the purpose of giving a phase displacement of I he 
flux, and therehy a starting torque. It is the simplest ;iml cheap- 
est single-phase motor-starting device, but gives only low start- 
ing torque and low torque efficiency, thus is not well suited for 
larger motors. It thus is very extensively used in small motors. 
almost exclusively in alternating-current fan motors. 

Single-phase Commutator Motor. —XX, 189. Commutator 
motor with alternating-current field excitation, and such modi- 
fications of design, as result therefrom. Thai is. lamination of 
the magnetic structure, high ratio of armature reaction to Geld 
excitation, and compensation for armature reaction and self- 
induction, etc. Such motor thus comprises three circuits: the 
armature circuit, the field circuit, and the compensating circuit 
in quadrature, on the stator, to the field circuit. These cir- 
cuits may be energized by conduction, from the main current, 
or by induction, as secondaries with the main current as pri- 
mary. If the armature receives the main current, the motor is 


REVIEW 469 

a series or shunt motor; if it is closed upon itself, directly or 
through another circuit, the motor is called a repulsion motor. 
A combination of both gives the series repulsion motor. 

Single-phase commutator motors of series characteristic are 
used for alternating-current railroading, of shunt characteristic 
as stationary motors, as for instance the induction repuhion 
motor, either as constant-speed high-starting-torque motors, or 
as adjustable-speed motors. 

Lagging the field magnetism, as by shunted resistance, pro- 
duces a lead of the armature current. This can be used for 
power-factor compensation, and single-phase commutator motors 
thereby built with very high power-factors. Or the machine, 
with lagging quadrature field excitation, can be used as effective 
capacity. The single-phase commutator motor is the only type 
which, with series field excitation, gives a varying-speed motor 
of series-motor characteristics, and with shunt excitation or its 
equivalent, give speed variation and adjustment like that of the 
direct-current motor with field control,, and is therefore exten- 
sively used. Its disadvantage, however, is the difficulty and 
limitation in design, resulting from the e.m.f . induced in the short- 
circuited coils under the brush, by the alternation of the main 
field, which tends toward sparking at the commutator. 

Single-phase Generation. — 135. 

Speed Control of Polyphase Induction Motor. — 

By resistance in the secondary, 8. Gives a speed varying 
with the load. 

By pyro-electric resista7ice in the secondary, 10. (lives good 
speed regulation at any speed, but such pyro-electric conductors 
tend toward instability. 

By condenser in the secondary, 11. (lives good speed regula- 
tion, but rather poor power-factor, and usually requires an un- 
economically large amount of capacity. 

By commutator, 58. Gives good speed regulation and per- 
mits power-factor control, but has the disadvantage and com- 
plication of an alternating-current commutator. 

By concatenation with a low-frequency commutating machine 
as exciter, 52. Has the disadvantage of complication. 

Stanley Induction Generator. — 117. Induction machine with 
low-frequency exciter. (See "Concatenation (2).") 

Stanley Inductor Alternator. — 150. Inductor machine with 
two armatures and inductors, and a concentric field coil between 
the same. (See "Inductor Machine.,,) 


470 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Starting Devices. — Polyphase induction motor: 

Remittance of high temperature coefficient, 2. Gives good torque 
curve at low speed and good regulation at speed, but requires 
high temperature in the resistance. 

Hysteresis device, 4. Gives good speed regulation and good 
torque at low speed and in starting, but somewhat impairs the 
power-factor. 

Eddy-current device, 5; double and triple squirrel-cage, 18. 20, 
24; and deep-bar rotor, 7. Give good speed regulation combined 
with good torque at low speed and in starting, but somewhat 
impairs I lie power-factor. (See " Double Squirrel-cage Induction 
Motor" and "Deep-bar Induction Motor."} 

Single-phase induction motor: 

Phase-splitting devices, 67. Resistance in one phase, 68. In- 
ductive devices, 72. Shading coil, 73. (See "Shading CoiL") 
Monocyclic devices, 76. Resistance-reactance device or mono- 
cyclic triangle. Condenser motor, 77. (See " Condenser Motor.") 

Repulsion-motor starting. 

Series-motor starting. 

Synchronous-induction Generator.— XIII, 113. Induction 
machine, in which the secondary is connected so as to Ba a definite 
speed. This may be done: 

1. By connecting the secondary, in reverse phase rotation, in 
shunt or in series to the primary: double gynehrotUrUi 

(See "Double Synchronous Machine.") 

2. By connecting the secondary in shunt to the primary 
through a commutator. In this ease, the resultant frequency is 
fixed by speed antl ratio of primary to secondary turns. 

3. By connecting the secondary to a source of constant low 
frequency; Stanley induction generator. In this case, the low- 
frequency phase rotation impressed upon the secondary may l>c 
in the same or in opposite direction to the speed. (See "Con* 
catenation (2).") 

Synchronous-induction Motor. — IX, 97. An induction motor 
with single-phase secondary. Tends to {hop into step as syn- 
chronoue motor, and then becomes generator when driven by 
power. Its low power-factor makes it unsuitable except fur 
small sixes, where the simplicity due to the absence of djreet 
current excitation may make it convenient as self-starling syn- 
chronous motor. As reaction machine, 150. 

Thomson-Houston Arc Machine. — 141-144. Three-phase V- 


REVIEW 471 

connected constant-current alternator with rectifying commu- 
tator. 

Thomson Repulsion Motor. — 193. Single-phase compensated 
commutating machine with armature energized by secondary 
current, and field coil and compensating coil combined in one coil. 

Unipolar Machines. — Unipolar or acyclic machine, XXII, 247. 
Machine in which a continuous voltage is induced by the rotation 
of a conductor through a constant and uniform magnetic field. 
Such machines must have as many pairs of collector rings as there 
are conductors, and the main magnetic flux of the machine must 
pass through the collector rings, hence current collection occurs 
from high-speed collector rings. Coil windings are impossible 
in unipolar machines. Such machines either are of low voltage, 
or of large size and high speed, thus had no application before 
the development of the high-speed steam turbine, and now three- 
phase generation with conversion by synchronous converter has 
eliminated the demand for very large direct-current generating 
units. The foremost disadvantage is the high-speed current 
collection, which is still unsolved, and the liability to excessive 
losses by eddy currents due to any asymmetry of the magnetic 
field. 

Winter-Eichbery-Latour Motor. — 194. Single-phase compen- 
sated series-type motor with armature excitation, that is, the 
exciting current, instead of through the field, passes through the 
armature by a set of auxiliary brushes in quadrature with the 
main brushes. Its advantage is the higher power-factor, due to 
the elimination of the field inductance, but its disadvantage the 
complication of an additional set of alternating-current commu- 
tator brushes.
