CHAPTER XX 
SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 

I. General 

189. Alternating-current commutating machines have so far 
become ef industrial importance mainly as motors of the series 
or varying-speed type, for single-phase railroading, and as con- 
stant-speed motors or adjustable-speed motors, where efficient 
acceleration under heavy torque is necessary. As generators, 
they would be of advantage for the generation of very low fre- 
quency, since in this case synchronous machines are uneconom- 
ical, due to their very low speed, resultant from the low frequency. 

The direction of rotation of a direct-current motor, whether 
shunt or series motor, remains the same at a reversal of the im- 
pressed e.m.f., as in this case the current in the armature circuit 
and the current in the field circuit and so the field magnetism 
both reverse. Theoretically, a direct-current motor therefore 
could be operated on an alternating impressed e.m.f. provided 
that the magnetic circuit of the motor is laminated, so as to fol- 
low the alternations of magnetism without serious loss of power, 
and that precautions are taken to have the field reverse simul- 
taneously with the armature. If the reversal of field magnetism 
should occur later than the reversal of armature current, during 
the time after the armature current has reversed, but before the 
field has reversed, the motor torque would be in opposite direc- 
tion and thus subtract; that is, the field magnetism of the alter- 
nating-current motor must be in phase with the armature cur- 
rent, or nearly so. This is inherently the case with the series 
type of motor, in which the same current traverses field coils 
and armature windings. 

Since in the alternating-current transformer the primary and 
secondary currents and the primary voltage and the secondary 
voltage are proportional to each other, the different circuits of 
the alternating-current commutator motor may be connected 
with each other directly (in shunt or in series, according to the 
type of the motor) or inductively, with the interposition of a 

331 


332 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


transformer, and for this purpose either a separate transformer 
may be used or the transformer feature embodied in the motor, 
as in the so-called repulsion type of motors. This gives to the 
alternating-current commutator motor a far greater variety of 
connections than possessed by the direct-current motor. 

While in its general principle of operation the alternating- 
current commutator motor is identical with the direct-cums! 
motor, in the relative proportioning of the parts a great differ- 
ence exists. In the direct-current motor, voltage is consumed 
by the counter e.m.f. of rotation, which represents the power 
output of the motor, and by the resistance, which represents 
the power loss. In addition thereto, in the alternating-cur rent 
motor voltage is consumed by the inductance, which is wattless 
or reactive and therefore causes a lag of current behind the vol- 
tage, that is, a lowering of the power-factor. While in the direct- 
current motor good design requires the combination of a strong 
field and a relatively weak armature, so as to reduce the armature 
reaction on the field to a minimum, in the design of the alter- 
iiatiiig-current motor considerations of power-factor predominate; 
that is, to secure low self-inductance and therewith a high power- 
factor, the combination of a strong armature and a weak field is 
required, and necessitates the use of methods to eliminate the 
harmful effects of high armature reaction. 

As the varying-speed single-phase commutator motor has 
found an extensive use as railway motor, this type of motor 
will as an instance be treated in the following, and the other 
types discussed in the concluding paragraphs. 

II. Power-factor 

190. In the commutating machine the magnetic field flux gen- 
erics the e.in.f. in the revolving armature conductors, which 
gives the motor output; the armature reaction, that is, the mag- 
net k Mux produced by the armature current, distorts and weakens 
the field, and requires a shifting of the brushes to avoid Bparldag 
due to the short-circuit current under the commutator brushes, 
and where the brushes can not l>e shifted, as in a reversible motor. 
this necessitates the use of a strong field and weak armature to 
keep down the magnetic flux at the brushes. In the alternating- 
current motor the magnetic field flux generates in the armature 
conductors by their rotation the e.m.f. which does the work of 
the motor, but, as the field flux is alternating, it also generates 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 333 

in the field conductors an e.m.f. of self-inductance, which is not 
useful but wattless, and therefore harmful in lowering the power- 
factor, hence must be kept as low as possible. 

This e.m.f. of self-inductance of the field, e0, is proportional 
to the field strength, $, to the number of field turns, n0, and to 
the frequency, /, of the impressed e.m.f. : 

eo = 2 ir/no* 10"8, (1) 

while the useful e.m.f. generated by the field in the armature 
conductors, or "e.m.f. of rotation," e, is proportional to the field 
strength, $, to the number of armature turns, nh and to the fre- 
quency of rotation of the armature, /<>: 

e = 2ir/on1<i> 10"8. (2) 

This later e.m.f., e, is in phase with the magnetic flux, $, and 
so with the current, i, in the series motor, that is, is a power e.m.f., 
while the e.m.f. of self-inductance, e0, is wattless, or in quadrature 
with the current, and the angle of lag of the motor current thus 
is given by: 

tan 6 = -^ (3) 

6 -r it 

where ir = voltage consumed by the motor resistance. Or ap- 
proximately, since ir is small compared with e (except at very 
low speed) : 

tan 6 = -> (4) 

e 

and, substituting herein (1) and (2): 

tan 6 - { -°- (5) 

Small angle of lag and therewith good power-factor therefore 
require high values of /0 and n\ and low values of / and n0. 

High /o requires high motor speeds and as large number of 
poles as possible. Low / means low impressed frequency; there- 
fore 25 cycles is generally the highest frequency considered for 
large commutating motors. 

High ni and low n0 means high armature reaction and low 
field excitation, that is, just the opposite conditions from that 
required for good commutator-motor design. 

Assuming synchronism, /o = /, as average motor speed — 750 
revolutions with a four-pole 25-cyclc motor — an armature reac- 


334 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


tion, n,, equal to the field excitation, n0, would then give tan 
6 = 1, 9 = 45°, or 70.7 per cent, power-factor; that is, with an 
armature reaction beyond the limits of good motor design, the 
power-factor is still too low for use. 

The armature, however, also has a 
self -inductance; that is, the magnetic 
flux produced by the armature cur- 
rent as shown diagrammatically in 
Fig. 155 generates a reactive e.m.f. in 
the armature conductors, which again 
lowers the power-factor. While this 
armature self-inductance is low with 
small number of armature turns, it 
becomes considerable when the num- 
ber of armature turns, rti, is large 
compared with the field turns, n0, 

Let fflo = field reluctance, that 
is, reluctance of the magnetic 
field circuit, and <Ri =- -r- = the armature reluctance, that is, 

6 = =- = ratio of reluctances of the armature and the field mag- 
netic circuit; then, neglecting magnetic saturation, the field flux 


Fig. 155. — Distribution of 

iiain field and field of a 
;ure reaction. 


the armature flux i; 


and the e.m.f. of self-inductance of the armature circuit h 
ex = 2»/ni*,10-s 


hence, the total e.m.f. of self -inductance of the motor, or wattless 
e.m.f., by (1) and (7) is: 

«, + ex = 2 J* 10- C'*,,6'1'')' (8) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 335 

and the angle of lag, 0, is given by: 

eo + ei 


tan 0 = 


e 
f n02 + bni2. 


/o notii 
or, denoting the ratio of armature turns to field turns by: 

tti 
q = -> 

n0 
tan 0 - J ' 


(9) 


=mJ + ^ <w> 


and this is a minimum; that is, the power-factor a maximum, for: 

^-{tanfl} = 0, 
or: 

*o = ^ (ID 

and the maximum power-factor of the motor is then given by: 

tan 0o = / -> • (12) 

h \/b 

Therefore the greater b is the higher the power-factor that 
can be reached by proportioning field and armature so that 

Tli 1 

no * y/b 

Since b is the ratio of armature reluctance to field reluctance, 
good power-factor thus requires as high an armature reluctance 
and as low a field reluctance as possible; that is, as good a mag- 
netic field circuit and poor magnetic armature circuit as feasible. 
This leads to the use of the smallest air gaps between field and 
armature which are mechanically permissible. With an air gap 
of 0.10 to 0.15 in. as the smallest safe value in railway work, b 
can not well be made larger than about 4. 

Assuming, then, 6 = 4, gives q = 2, that is, twice as many 
armature turns as field turns; rti = 2 n0. 

The angle of lag in this case is, by (12), at synchronism:/© = /, 

tan 0O = 1, 

giving a power-factor of 70.7 per cent. 

It follows herefrom that it is not possible, with a mechanically 


336 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

safe construction, at 25 cycles to get a good power-factor 
moderate speed, from a straight series motor, even if such a 
design as discussed above were not inoperative, due to rate 
distortion and therefore destructive sparking. 

Thus it becomes necessary in the single-phase com mutator 
motor to reduce the magnetic flux of armature reaction, thai is, 
increase the effective magnetic reluctance of the armature fur 
beyond the value of the true magnetic reluctance. This is m- 
complished by the compensating winding devised by Eirkemeyer, 
by surrounding the armature with a stationary winding chist-ly 
adjacent and parallel to the armature winding, and energized by 
a current in opposite direction to the armature currem. ;imi ti 
the same m.m.f., that is, the same number of ampere-turns, 
the armature winding. 


s 

F 

N. 

( / 

\ 

rf 

\ 1 

f » 

e 

M 

/ > 

C v 

/ 

n 
SI 

y 

pha. 


commutator n 


191. Every single-phase commutator motor thus comprises a 
field winding, F, an armature winding, A, and a compensating 
winding, C, usually located in the pole faces of the field, as shown 
in Figs. 156 and 157. 

The compensating winding, 0, is either connected in aeriea - Imt 
in reversed direction) with the armature winding, and then has 
the same number of effective turns, or it is short-circuited upon 
itself, thus acting as a short-circuited secondary with the arma- 
ture winding as primary, or the compensating winding i| ener- 
gized by the supply current, and the armature short-circuited as 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


337 


secondary. The first rase Rives the eonduetively compensated 
series motor, the second case the inductively compensated series 
motor, the third case the repulsion motor. 

In the first case, by giving the compensating winding more 
turns than the armature, overcompensation, by giving it lesB 
turns, undercompensation, is produced. In the second case 
always complete (or practically complete) compensation results, 
irrespective of the number of turns of the winding, as primary 
and secondary currents of a transformer always are opposite in 
direction, and of the same m.m.f. (approximately), and in the 
third case a somewhat less complete compensation. 

With a compensating winding, C, of equal and opposite m.m.f. 
to the armature winding, A, the resultant armature reaction is 
zero, and the field distortion, therefore, disappears; that is, the 
ratio of the armature turns to field turns has no direct effect on 
the commutation, but high armature turns and low field turns 
can be used. The armature self-inductance is reduced from that 
corresponding to the armature magnetic flux, *i, in Fig. 155 to 
that corresponding to the magnetic leakage flux, that is, the 
magnetic flux passing between armature turns and compensating 
turns, or the "slot inductance," which is small, especially if rela- 
tively shallow armature slots and compensating slots are used. 

The compensating winding, or the "cross field," thus fulfils 
the twofold purpose of reducing the armature self-inductance to 
that of the leakage flux, and of neutralizing the armature reac- 
tion and thereby permitting the use of very high armature 
ampere-turns. 

The main purpose of the compensating winding thus is to de- 
crease the armature self-inductance; that is, increase the effect- 
ive armature reluctance and thereby its ratio to the field reluc- 
tance, b, and thus permit the use of a much higher ratio, q = ', 
before maximum power-factor is reached, and thereby a higher 
power-factor. 

Even with compensating winding, with increasing q, ultimately 
a point is reached where the armature self-inductance equals 
the field self-inductance, and beyond this the power-factor again 
decreases. It becomes possible, however, by the use of the com- 
pensating winding, to reach, with a mechanically good design, 
values of 6 as high as 16 to 20. 

Assuming b = 16 gives, substituted in (11) and (12): 

s-4; 


338 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

that is, four times as many armature turns as field turns, i*j 
4 no and : 

tan ,. - fe 
hence, at synchronism: 

fa = / : tan 0O = 0.5, or 89 per cent, power-factor. 

At double synchronism, which about represents maximum motor 
speed at 25 cycles: 

/o = 2/ : tan 80 = 0.25, or 98 per cent, power-factor; 

that is, very good power-factors can be reached in the single- 
phase commutator motor by the use of a compensating winding, 
far higher than are possible with the same air gap in polyphase 
induction motors. 

III. Field Winding and Compensating Winding 

192. The purpose of the field winding is to produce the maxi- 
mum magnetic flux, $, with the minimum number of turns, n,. 
This requires as large a magnetic section, especially at the air 
gap, as possible. Hence, a massed field winding with definite 
polar projections of as great pole arc as feasible, as shown in Fig. 
157, gives a better power-factor than a distributed field winding. 

The compensating winding must be as closely adjacent, to the 
armature winding as possible, so as to give minimum teoksfj 
flux between armature conductors and compensating conductors, 
and therefore is a distributed winding, located in the field poll 
faces, as shown in Fig. 1,57. 

The armature winding is distributed over the whole timuO; 
feretice of the armature, but the compensating winding only in 
the field pole faces. With the same ampere-turns in armature 
and compensating winding, their resultant ampere-turns are 
equal and opposite, and therefore neutralize, but locally the two 
windings do not neutralize, due to the difference in the distribu- 
tion curves of their m.m.fs. The m.m.f. of the field winding is 
constant over the pole faces, and from one pole corner to the next 
pole corner reverses in direction, as shown diagninniui i. ■:! . 
by F in Fig. 158, which is the development of Fig. 157. The 
m.m.f. of the armature is a maximum at the brushes, midway 
between the field poles, as shown by A in Fig. 158, and from there 
decreases to zero in the center of the field pole. The m.m.f. of 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 339 

the compensating winding, however, is constant in the space 
from pole corner to pole corner, as shown by C in Fig. 158, and 
since the total m.m.f. of the compensating winding equals that 
of the armature, the armature m.m.f. is higher at the brushes, 
the compensating m.m.f. higher in front of the field poles, as 
shown by curve R in Fig. 158, which is the difference between 
A and C; that is, with complete compensation of the resultant 
armature and compensating winding, locally undercompensation 
exists at the brushes, overcompensation in front of the field 


Fio. 158. — Distribution of m.m.f. in compensated motor. 

poles. The local undercompensated armature reaction at the 
brushes generates an e.m.f. in the coil short-circuited under the 
brush, and therewith a short-circuit current of commutation 
and sparking. In the conductively compensated motor, this can 
be avoided by overcompensation, that is, raising the flat top of 
the compensating m.m.f. to the maximum armature m.m.f., but 
this results in a lowering of the power-factor, due to the self- 
inductive flux of overcompensation, and therefore is undesirable. 
193. To get complete -compensation even locally requires the 
compensating winding to give the same distribution curve as the 
armature winding, or inversely. The former is accomplished by 
distributing the compensating winding around the entire cir- 
cumference of the armature, as shown in Fig. 159. This, how- 
ever, results in bringing the field coils further away from the 
armature surface, aftd so increases the magnetic stray flux of the 
field winding, that is, the magnetic flux, which passes through 
the field coils, and there produces a reactive voltage of self-in- 


340 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


ductance, but does not pass through the armature conductor? 
and so does no work; that is, it lowers the power factor, just 
overcompensation would do. The distribution curve of the 
armature winding can, however, W 
made equal to that of the compen- 
sating winding, and therewith local 
complete compensation secured, by 
using a fractional pitch armature 
winding of a pitch equal to the pole 
arc. In this case, in the space be- 
tween the pole corners, the current* 
are in opposite direction in the 
upper and the lower layer of con- 
ductors in each armature slot, 
shown in Fig. 160, ami thus DeutmUlB 
magnetically; that is, the armature 
reaction extends only over the spacr 
of the armature circumference covered 
by the pole arc, where it is neutralized 
by the compensating winding in the pole face. 

To produce complete compensation even locally, without im- 
pairing tbe~power-factor, therefore, requires a fractional-pitch 


Fio. 159.— Completely 
distributed compensating 

winding. 


armature winding, of a pitch equal to the field pole arc, or s< 
equivalent arrangement. 

Historically] the first compensated single-phase commutfttov 
motors, built about 20 years ago, were Prof. Elihu Thomeea^ 
repulsion motors. In these the field winding and coin pen sating 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 341 

winding were massed together in a single coil, as shown diagram- 
matically in Fig. 161. Repulsion motors are still occasionally 
built in which field and compensating coils are combined in a 
single distributed winding, as shown in Fig. 162. Soon after the 
first repulsion motor, conductively and inductively compensated 
series motors were built by Eickemeyer, with a massed field 
winding and a separate compensating winding, or cross coil, 
either as single coil or turn or distributed in a number of coils or 
turns, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 163, and by W. Stanley. 


QC 


\±is 


Fig. 162. — Repulsion motor with Fig. 163. — Eickemeyer inductively 
distributed winding. compensated series motor. 

For reversible motors, separate field coils and compensating 
coils are always used, the former as massed, the latter as dis- 
tributed winding, since in reversing the direction of rotation 
either the field winding alone must be reversed or armature and 
compensating winding are reversed while the field winding re- 
mains unchanged. 


IV. Types of Varying-speed Single-phase Commutator Motors 

194. The armature and compensating windings are in induc- 
tive relations to each other. In the single-phase commutator 
motor with series characteristic, armature and compensating 
windings therefore can be connected in series with each other, or 
the supply voltage impressed upon the one, the other closed upon 
itself as secondary circuit, or a part of the supply voltage im- 
pressed upon the one, and another part upon the other circuit, 
and in either of these cases the field winding may be connected 
in series either to the compensating winding or to the armature 
winding. This gives the motor types, denoting the armature by 


342 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


(D 


(4) 


(2) 


(6) 


(3) 


(6) 


(7) 


Fio. 164. — Types of alternating-current coramutating motors. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 343 

* • 

A, the compensating winding by C, and the field winding by F, 
shown in Fig. 164. 

Primary Secondary 


A+F 

• • • 

Series motor. 

A + C + F 

• • • 

Conductively compensated 
series motor. (1) 

A +F 

C 

Inductively compensated 
series motor. (2) 

A 

C + F 

Inductively compensated 
series motor with second- 
ary excitation, or inverted 
repulsion motor. (3) 

C + F 

A 

Repulsion motor. (4) 

C 

A +F 

Repulsion motor with sec- 
ondary excitation. (5) 

A+F,C 

■■■} 

• • • j 

Series repulsion motors. 

A, C + F 

(6) (7) 

Since in all these motor types all three circuits are connected 
directly or inductively in series with each other, they all have 
the same general characteristics as the direct-current series 
motor; that is, a speed which increases with a decrease of load, 
and a torque per ampere input which increases with increase of 
current, and therefore with decrease of speed, and the different 
motor types differ from each other only by their commutation 
as affected by the presence or absence of a magnetic flux at the 
brushes, and indirectly thereby in their efficiency as affected by 
commutation losses. 

In the conductively compensated series motor, by the choice 
of the ratio of armature and compensating turns, overcompensa- 
tion, complete compensation, or undercompensation can be pro- 
duced. In all the other types, armature and compensating 
windings are in inductive relation, and the compensation there- 
fore approximately complete. 

A second series of motors of the same varying speed charac- 
teristics results by replacing the stationary field coils by arma- 
ture excitation, that is, introducing the current, either directly 
or by transformer, into the armature by means of a second set 
of brushes at right angles to the main brushes. Such motors 
are used to some extent abroad. They have the disadvantage of 


344 


ELECTRICAL APPARA TU8 


Fig. 1(55.- 


req Hiring two sots of brushes, but the advantage that their 
power-factor can be controlled and above synchronism even 
lending current produced. Fig. ll>5 shows diagrammatical!}- surli 
a motor, as designed by Winter- Eichberg-Latour, the so-called 
compensated repulsion motor. In this case componsatei! meant: 
compensated for power-factor. 

The voltage which can be used in the motor armature is limited 
by the commutator: the voltage per commutator segment is 
limited by the problem of sparkless commutation, the number 
of commutator segments Frew 
brush to brush is limited 
mechanical consideration of 
commutator speed and width 
of segments. In those motet 
types in which the supply cur- 
rent traverses the armature, the 
supply voltage is thus limited 
to values even lower than in 
the direct-current motor, while 
in the repulsion motor (4 and 
5), in which the armature is the 
secondary circuit, the armature voltage is independent of the 
supply voltage, so can be chosen to suit the requirement! i ■: 
commutation, while the motor can be built for any supply 
voltage for which the stator can economically 1m? insulated. 

Alternating-current motors as well as direct-current scries 
motors can be controlled by series parallel connection of two or 
more motors. Further control, as in starting, with direct -current 
motors is carried out by rheostat, while with alternating-current 
motors potential conlrol, that is, a change of supply voltage by 
transformer or autotransformer, offers a more efficient method 
of control. By changing from one motor type to another motor 
type, potential control can bo, used in alternating-current motors 
without any change of supply voltage, by appropriately choosing 
the ratio of turns of primary and secondary circuit. For in- 
stance, with an armature wound for half the voltage and thus 

twice the current as the compensating winding (ratio of turns 

- = 2) , a change of connection from tvpc 3 to type 2, or from 

type 5 to type 4, results in doubling the field current and there- 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 345 

with the field strength. A change of distribution of voltage be- 
tween the two circuits, in types 6 and 7, with A and C wound 
for different voltages, gives the same effect as a change of supply 
voltage, and therefore is used for motor control. 

196. In those motor types in which a transformation of power 
occurs between compensating winding, C, and armature winding, 
A, a transformer flux exists in the direction of the brushes, that 
is, at right angles to the field flux. In general, therefore, the 
single-phase commutator motor contains two magnetic fluxes in 
quadrature position with each other, the main flux or field flux, 
A', in the direction of the axis of the field coils, or at right angles 
to the armature brushes, and the quadrature flux, or transformer 
flux, or commu taring flux, *j, in line with the armature brushes, 
or in the direction of the axis of the compensating winding, that 
is, at right angles (electrical) with the field flux. 

The field flux, *, depends upon and is in phase with the field 
current, except as far as it is modified by the magnetic action of 
the short-circuit current in the armature coil under the commu- 
tator brushes. 

In the conductively compensated series motor, 1, the quad- 
rature flux is zero at complete compensation, and in the direc- 
tion of the armature reaction with undercompensation, in oppo- 
sition to the armature reaction at overcompensation, but in 
either ease in phase with the current and so approximately with 
the field. 

In the other motor types, whatever quadrature flux exists is 
not in phase with the main flux, but as transformer flux is due 
to the resultant m.ui.f. of primary and secondary circuit. 

In a transformer with non-inductive or nearly non-inductive 
secondary circuit, the magnetic flux is nearly 90° in time phase 
behind the primary current, a little over 90° ahead of the sec- 
ondary current, as shown in transformer diagram, Tig. 166. 

In a transformer with inductive secondary, the magnetic flux 
is less than 90" liehind the primary current, more than 90° ahead 
of the secondary current, the more so the higher is the inductivity 
of the secondary circuit, as shown by the transformer diagram, 
Fig. 166. 

Herefrom it follows that: 

In the inductively compensated series motor, 2, the quad- 
rature flux is very small and practically negligible, as very little 
voltage is consumed in the low impedance of the secondary cir- 
cuit, C; whatever flux there is, lags behind the main flux. 


346 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


In the inductively compensated series ipotor with secondary 
excitation, or inverted repulsion motor, 3, the quadrature flux, 
$1, is quite large, as a considerable voltage is required for the 
field excitation, especially at moderate speeds and therefore high 
currents, and this flux, $i, lags behind the field flux, $, but this 
lag is very much less than 90°, since the secondary circuit is 


•-J* 


Fig. 166. — Transformer diagram, inductive and non-inductive load. 

highly inductive; the motor field thus corresponding to the con- 
ditions of the transformer diagram, Fig. 166. As result hereof, 
the commutation of this type of motor is very good, flux, $i, 
having the proper phase and intensity required for a commu- 
tating flux, as will be seen later, but the power-factor is poor. 

In the repulsion motor, 4, the quadrature flux is very consid- 
erable, since all the voltage consumed by the rotation of the 
armature is induced in it by transformation from the compen- 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


347 


sating winding, and this quadrature flux, *i, laps nearly 90° be- 
hind the main flux, *, since the secondary circuit is nearly non- 
inductive, especially at speed. 

In the repulsion motor with secondary excitation, 5, the quad- 
rature flux, *i, is also very large, and practically constant, corre- 
sponding to the impressed e.m.f., but lags considerably less than 
90° behind the main flux, $, the secondary circuit being induct- 
ive, since it contains the field coil, F. The lag of the flux, *i, 
increases with increasing speed, since with increasing speed the 
e.m.f. of rotation of the armature increases, the e.m.f. of self- 
inductance of the field decreases, due to the decrease of current, 
and the circuit thus becomes less inductive. 

The series repulsion motors 6 and 7, give the same phase rela- 
tion of the quadrature flux, $i, as the repulsion motors, 5 and 6, 
but the intensity of the quadrature flux, $i, is the less the smaller 
the part of the supply voltage which is impressed upon the com- 
pensating winding. 

V. Commutation 

196. In the commutator motor, the current in each armature 
coil or turn reverses during its passage under the brush. In the 
armature coil, while short-circuited by the commutator brush, 
the current must die out to zero and then increase again to its 
original value in opposite direction. The resistance of the arma- 
ture coil and brush contact accelerates, the self-inductance re- 
tards the dying out of the current, and the former thus assists, 
tin1 latter impairs commutation. If an e.m.f. is generated in 
the armature coil by its rotation while short-circuited by the 
commutator brush, this e.m.f. opposes commutation, that is, 
retards the dying out of the current, if due to the magnetic flux 
of armature reaction, and assists commutation by reversing the 
armature current, if due to the magnetic flux of overcompensa- 
tion, that is, a magnetic flux in opposition to the armature 
reaction. 

Therefore, in the direct-current commutator motor with high 
field strength and low armature reaction, that is, of negligible 
magnetic flux of armature reaction, fair commutation is produced 
with the brushes set midway between the field poles — -that is, 
in the position where the armature coil which is being commu- 
tated encloses the full field flux and therefore cuts no flux and 
has no generated e.m.f. — by using high-resistance carbon brushes, 


348 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


as the resistance of the brush contact, increasing when the arma- 
ture coil begins to leave the brush, tends to reverse the current. 
Such "resistance commutation" obviously can not be perfect; 
perfect commutation, however, is produced by impressing upon 
the motor armature at right angles to the main field, thai is, UD 
the position of the commutator brushes, a magnetic field oppo- 
site to that of the armature reaction and proportional to the 
armature current. Such a field is produced by overcompensa- 
tion or by the use of a commutating pole or interpole. 

As seen in the foregoing, in the direct-current motor t he counter 
e.m.f. of self-inductance of commutation opposes the reversal of 
current in the armature coil under the commutator brush, and 
this can be mitigated in its effect by the use of high-resistance 
brushes, and overcome by the commutating field of overcompen- 
sation. In addition hereto, however, in the alternating-current 
commutator motor an e.m.f. is generated in the coil short-cir- 
cuited under the brush, by the alternation of the magnetic flux, 
and this e.m.f., which does not exist in the direct-current motor, 
makes the problem of commutation of the alternating-current 
motor far more difficult. In the position of commutation no 
e.m.f. is generated in the armature coil by its rotation through 
the magnetic field, as in this position the coil encloses the maxi- 
mum field flux; but as this magnetic flux is alternating, in this 
position the e.m.f. generated by the alternation of the flux en- 
closed by the coil is a maximum. This "e.m.f. of alternation*1 
lags in time 90° behind the magnetic flux which generates it, h 
proportional to the magnetic flux and to the frequency, but is 
independent of the speed, hence exists also at standstill, while 
the "e.m.f. of rotation" — which is a maximum in the position 
of the armature coil midway between the brushes, or parallel to 
the field flux — is in phase with the field flux and proportional 
thereto and to the speed, but independent of the frequency. In 
the alternating-current commutator motor, no position therefore 
exists in which the armature coil is free from a generated e.m.f., 
but in the position parallel to the field, or midway between tin 
brushes, the e.m.f. of rotation, in phase with the field flux, is a 
maximum, while the e.m.f. of alternation is zero, and in the posi- 
tion under the commutator brush, or enclosing the total field 
flux, the e.m.f. of alternation, in electrical space quadrature with 
the field flux, is a maximum, the e.m.f. of rotation absent, while 
in any other position of the armature coil its generated e.m.f. has 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 349 

a component due to the rotation — a power e.m.f. — and a com- 
ponent due to the alternation — a reactive e.m.f. The armature 
coils of an alternating-current commutator motor, therefore, are 
the seat of a system of polyphase e.m.f s., and at synchronism 
the polyphase e.m.fs. generated in all armature coils are equal, 
above synchronism the e.m.f. of rotation is greater, while 
below synchronism the e.m.f. of alternation is greater, and in 
the latter case the brushes thus stand at that point of the com- 
mutator where the voltage between commutator segments is a 
maximum. This e.m.f. of alternation, short-circuited by the 
armature coil in the position of commutation, if not controlled, 
causes a short-circuit current of excessive value, and therewith 
destructive sparking; hence, in the alternating-current commuta- 
tor motor it is necessary to provide means to control the short- 
circuit current under the commutator brushes, which results from 
the alternating character of the magnetic flux, and which docs 
not exist in the direct-current motor; that is, in the alternating- 
current motor the armature coil under the brush is in the posi- 
tion of a short-circuited secondary, with the field coil as primary 
of a transformer; and as in a transformer primary and secondary 
ampere-turns are approximately equal, if n0 = number of field 
turns per pole and i = field current, the current in a single arma- 
ture turn, when short-circuited by the commutator brush, tends 
to become io = n0i, that is, many times full-load current; and 
as this current is in opposition, approximately, to the field cur- 
rent, it would demagnetize the field; that is, the motor field 
vanishes, or drops far down, and the motor thus loses its torque. 
Especially is this the case at the moment of starting; at speed, 
the short-circuit current is somewhat reduced by the self-induc- 
tance of the armature turn. That is, during the short time 
during which the armature turn or coil is short-circuited by the 
brush the short-circuit current can not rise to its full value, if 
the speed is considerable, but it is still sufficient to cause destruc- 
tive sparking. 

197. The character of the commutation of the motor, and 
therefore its operativeness, thus essentially depends upon the 
value and the phase of the short-circuit currents under the com- 
mutator brushes. An excessive short-eimiit current, gives de- 
structive sparking by high-current density under the brushes 
and arcing at the edge of the brushes due to the great and sud- 
den change of current in the armature coil when leaving the 


350 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


brush. But even with a moderate short-circuit current, the 
sparking at the commutator may be destructive and the motor 
therefore inoperative, if the phase of the short-circuit current 
greatly differs from that of the current in the armature coil after 
it leaves the brush, and so a considerable and sudden change of 


VI LTS 

n - 

/ 

' 

I ' 

a 

n ' 

0 1 

AMP 

a i 

PKI SQ. H. 
0 1GO1SO2O02202W26O29O3W 

Fin. 167.— E.m.f. consumed at contact of copper brush. 

current must take place at the moment when the armature coil 
leaves the brush. That is, perfect commutation occurs, if the 
short-circuit current in the armature coil under the commutator 
brush at the moment when the coil leaves the brush has the 
same value and the same phase as the main-armature current in 


__v_ 

LT_=. 

0 

I 2 

| 

1 

fly 
0 

.ft 

0 

HJ 

0 I 

0 1 

0 1 

0 i 

B 1 

0 i 

■0 

. 168.— E.m.f. consumed ft 


t of higli-i 


earhon brush. 


the coil after leaving the brush. The commutation of such a 
motor therefore is essentially characterized by the difference 
between the main-armature current after, and the short-circuit 
current before leaving the brush. The investigation of the short- 
circuit current under the commutator brushes therefore is of 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 351 

fundamental importance in the study of the alternating-current 
commutator motor, and the control of this short-circuit current 
the main problem of alternating-current commutator motor 
design. 

Various means have been proposed and tried to mitigate or 
eliminate the harmful effect of this short-circuit current, as high 
resistance or high reactance introduced into the armature coil 
during commutation, or an opposing e.m.f . either from the out- 
side, or by a commutating field. 

High-resistance brush contact, produced by the use of very 
narrow carbon brushes of high resistivity, while greatly improv- 
ing the commutation and limiting the short-circuit current so 
that it does not seriously demagnetize the field and thus cause 
the motor to lose its torque, is not sufficient, for the reason that 
the resistance of the brush contact is not high enough and also is 
not constant. The brush contact resistance is not of the nature 
of an ohmic resistance, but more of the nature of a counter 
e.m.f.; that is, for large currents the potential drop at the brushes 
becomes approximately constant, as seen from the volt-ampere 
characteristics of different brushes given in Figs. 167 and 168. 
Fig. 167 gives the voltage consumed by the brush contact of a 
copper brush, with the current density as abscissae, while Fig. 
168 gives the voltage consumed by a high-resistance carbon 
brush, with the current density in the brush as absciss®. It is 
seen that such a resistance, which decreases approximately in- 
versely proportional to the increase of current, fails in limiting 
the current just at the moment where it is most required, that 
s, at high currents. 

Commutator Leads 

198. Good results have been reached by the use of metallic 
resistances in the leads between the armature and the commuta- 
tor. As shown diagrammatically in Fig. 169, each commutator 
segment connects to the armature, A , by a high non-inductive 
resistance, CBy and thus two such resistances are always in the 
circuit of the armature coil short-circuited under the brush, but 
also one or two in series with the armature main circuit, from 
brush to brush. While considerable power may therefore l>c 
consumed in these high-resistance leads, neverthelebs the effi- 
ciency of the motor is greatly increased by their use; that is, the 
reduction in the loss of power at the commutator by the reduction 


352 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

of the short-circuit current, usually is far greater than the mfltt 
of power in the resistance leads. To have any apprecial <[•■ i-ffoci , 
the resistance of the commutator lead must lie far higher thau 
that of the armature coil to which it connects. Of the e.m.f. 
of rotation, that is, the useful generated e.m.f., the armature re- 
sistance consumes only a very small part, a few per cent. only. 
The e.m.f. of alternation is of the same magnitude as the e.in.f. 
of rotation — higher below, lower above synchronism. With B 
short-circuit current equal to full-load current, the resistance of 


Fee. 160, — Commutation with resistance leads. 

the short-circuit coil would consume only a small part of the 
e.m.f. of alternation, and to consume the total e.m.f. the short- 
circuit current therefore would have to lie about as many times 
larger than the normal armature current as the useful generated 
e.m.f. of the motor is larger than the resistance drop in the arma- 
ture. Long before this value of short-circuit current is reached 
the magnetic field would have disappeared by the demagnetuui| 
force of the short-circuit current, that is, the motor would have 
lost its torque. 

To limit the short-circuit current under the brush to a value 
not very greatly exceeding full-load current, thus requires a re- 
sistance of the lead, many times greater than that of (he animt un- 
coil. The i-r in the lead, and thus the heat produced in it, then, 
is many times greater than that in the armature coil. The space 
available for the resistance lead is, however, less than that avail- 
able for the armature coil. 

It is obvious herefrom that it is not feasible to build these 
resistance leads so that each lead can dissipate continuously, or 
even for any appreciable time, without rapid si -If-drst ruction, 
the heat produced in it while in circuit. 

When the motor is revolving, even very slowly, thiaiaatH DM 
essary, since each resistance lead is only a very short tmn- in 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


circuit, during the moment when the armature c 
to it are short-circuited by the brushes; that is, if t 


i connecting 

■ number of 


armature turns from brush to brush, the lead is only - of the 

time in circuit, and though excessive current densities in mate* 
rials of high resistivity are used, the heating is moderate. In 
starting the motor, however, if it does not start instantly, the 
current continues to flow through the same resistance leads, and 
thus they are overheated and destroyed if the motor does not 
start promptly. Hence care has to be taken not to have such 
motors stalled for any appreciable time with voltage on. 

The most serious objection to the use of high- re si stance leads, 
therefore, is their liability to self-destruction by heating if the 
motor fails to start immediately, as for instance in a railway 
motor when putting the voltage on the motor before the brakes 
are released, as is done when starting on a steep up-grade to 
keep the train from starting to run back. 

Thus the advantages of resistance commutator leads are the 
improvement in commutation resulting from the reduced short- 
circuit current, and the ahsence o fa serious demagnetizing effect 
on the field at the moment of starting, which would result from 
an excessive short-circuit current under the brush, and such 
leads are therefore extensively used ; their disadvantage, however, 
is that when they are used the motor must be sure to start im- 
mediately by the application of voltage, otherwise they are liable 
to l>e destroyed. 

It is obvious that even with high -resistance commutator leads 
the commutation of the motor can not be as good as that of the 
motor on direct-current supply; that is, such an alternating- 
current motor inherently is more or less inferior in commutation 
to the direct-current motor, and to compensate for this effect 
far more favorable constants must be chosen in the ruotui design 
than permissible with a direct-current motor, that is, a lower 
voltage per commutator segment and lower magnetic flux per 
pole, hence a lower supply voltage on the armature, and thus B 
larger armature current and therewith a larger commutator, etc. 

The insertion of reactance instead of resistance in the leads 
connecting the commutator segments with the armature nib of 
the single-phase motor also has Ix-i-ri proposed And UWd f'ir 
limiting the short-circuit current, under I lie commutator brush. 

Reactance has the advantage over resistance, that the voltage 


864 ELECTRICAL APPABA TVS 

consumed by it is wattless and therefore produces no scrum- 
heating and reactive leads of low resistance thus are not liable 
to self-destruction by heating if the motor fails to start im- 
mediately. 

On account of the limited apace available in the railway motor 
considerable difficulty, however, is found in designing sufficiently 
high reactances which du not saturate and thus decrease nt 
larger currents. 

At speed, reactance in the armature coils is very objectionable 
in retarding the reversal of current, and indeed one of the most 
important problems in the design of commu.tating machines 
give the armature coils the lowest possible reactance. There- 
fore, the insertion of reactance in the motor leads tnterfffW 
seriously with the commutation of the motor at speed, and ihn- 
requires the use of a suitable commutating or reversing flux, thai 
is, a magnetic field at the commutator brushes of sufficient 
strength to reverse the current, against the self-inductance of the 
armature coil, by means of an e.m.f. generated in the armature 
coil by its rotation. This commutating flux thus must he m 
phase with the main current, that is, a flux of overcompensation. 
Reactive leads require the use of a commutating flux of over- 
compensation to give fair commutation at speed. 

Counter E.m.fs. in Commutated Coil 

199. Theoretically, the correct way of eliminating the de- 
structive effect of the short-circuit current under the 
tutor brush resulting from the e.m.f. of alternation of the main 
flux would be to neutralize the e.m.f. of alternation by an equal 
but opposite e.m.f. inserted into the armature coil or generated 
therein. Practically, however, at least with most motor typos, 
considerable difficulty is met in producing such a neutralizing 
e.m.f. of the proper intensity as well as phase. Since the alter- 
nating current has not only an intensity but also a phase displace- 
ment, with an alternating-current motor the production of com 
mutating flux or commutating voltage is more difficult than with 
direct-current motors in which the intensity is the only v;n t.iM. 

By introducing an external e.m.f. into the short-circuited 
under the brush it is rml possible entirely to neutralise itfl BJB ' 
of alternation, hut simply to reduce it to one-half. Several such 
arrangements were developed in the early days by Ekkettoyar, 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 355 

for instance the arrangement shown in Fig. 170, which represents 
the development of a commutator. The commutator consists 
of alternate live segments, S, and dead segments, S', that is, seg- 
ments not connected to armature coils, and shown shaded in 
Fig. 170. Two sets of brushes on the commutator, the one, Bt, 


\MMS\m 


Fig. 170. — Commutation with external e.m.f, 

ahead in position from the other, Bt, by one commutator seg- 
ment, and connected to the first by a coil, N, containing an e.m.f. 
equal in phase, but half in intensity, and opposite, to the e.m.f. 
of alternation of the armature coil; that is, if the armature coil 
contains a single turn, coil A' is a half turn located in the main 


Fio. 171. — Commutation by external e 
field space; if the armature coil, A, contains m turns, '„ turns in 
the main field space are used in coil, N. The dead segments, S', 
are cut between the brushes, Bx and /Jj, so as not to short-circuit 
between the brushes. 

In this manner, during the motion of the brush over the com- 


356 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

mutator, as shown by Fig. 171 in its successive steps, in position: 

1. There is current through brush, B\\ 

2. There is current through both brushes, Si and B«, and the 

armature coil, A, is closed by the counter e.m.f. of coil, 
.V, that is, the difference, A — JV, is short-circuited; 

3. There is current through brush B3; 

4. There is current through both brushes, B, and Bt, and the 

coil, JV, is short-circuited; 

5. The current enters again by brush Bi; 

thus alternately the coil, JV, of half the voltage of the armature 
coil, A, or the difference between A and JV is short-circuited, 
that is, the short-circuit current reduced to one-half. 

Complete elimination of the short-circuit current can be pro- 
duced by generating in the armature coil an opposing e.m.f. 
This e.m.f. of neutralization, however, can not be generated by 
the alternation of the magnetic flux through the coil, as this would 
require a flux equal but opposite to the full field flux travers- 
ing the coil, and thus destroy the main field of the motor. The 
neutralizing e.m.f., therefore, must be generated by the rotetifin 
of the armature through the commutating field, and thus can 
occur only at speed; that is, neutralization of the short-circuit 
current is possible only when the motor is revolving, but not while 
at rest. 

200. The e.m.f. of alternation in the armature coil short-cir- 
cuited under the commutator brush is proportional to the main 
field, *, to the frequency, /, and is in quadrature with the main 
field, being generated by its rate of change; hence, it can be rep- 
resented by 

eo -2r/*10-*/. (17) 

The e.m.f., e,, generated by the rotation of the armature coil 
through a commutating field, *', is, however, in phase with the 
field which produces it; and since d must be equal and in phase 
with e0 to neutralize it, the commutating field, *', therefore, must 
be in phase with e0, hence in quadrature with *; that is, the com- 
mutating field, *', of the motor must be in quadrature witfa tin 
main'field, *, to generate a neutralizing voltage, e,, of the proper 
phase to oppose the e.m.f. of alternation in the short-circuited 
coil. This e.m.f., ei, is proportional to its generating field. *', 
and to the speed, or frequency of rotation, f„, hence is: 

ei =2t/„*'10-s, ,lv. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 
nil Si = p„ it then follow* that: 


*' = j-t 


/.' 


(19) 


] 

I 
1 

I 


that is, the commutating field of the single-phase motor must 
be in quadrature behind and proportional to the main field, pro- 
portional to the frequency and inversely proportional to the 
speed; hence, at synchronism, /» = /, the commutation field 
equals the main field in intensity, and, being displaced therefrom 
1 quadrature both in time and in space, the motor thus must 
have a uniform rotating field, just as the induction motor. 

Above synchronism, fa > f, the commutating field, *', is less 
than the main field; below synchronism, however, /& < /, the 
commutating field must be greater than the main field to give 
complete compensation. It obviously is not feasible to increase 
the commutating field much beyond the main field, u this would 
require an increase of the iron section of the motor beyond that 
required to do the work, that is, to carry the main field flux. At 
standstill *' should be infinitely large, that is, compensation is 
not possible. 

Hence, by the use of a commutating field in time and space 
quadrature, in the single-phase motor the short-circuit current 
under the commutator brushes resulting from the e.m.f. of alter- 
nation can be entirely eliminated at and above synchronism, 
and more or less reduced below synchronism, the more the nearer 
the speed is to synchronism, but no effect can be produced at 
standstill. In such a motor either some further method, as re- 
sistance leads, must, be used to take care of the short-circuit cur- 
rent at standstill, or the motor designed so that its commutator 
can carry the short-circuit current for the small fraction of time 
when the motor is at. standstill or running at very low speed. 

The main field, *,of the series motor is approximately inversely 
proportional to the speed, /0, since the product of speed and field 
strength, /0*, is proportional to the e.m.f. of rotation, or useful 
e.m.f. of the motor, hence, neglecting losses anil phase displace- 
ments, to the impressed e.m.f., that is, constant. Substituting 
. — a. n>tior» &.. — main field at synchronism, into 


358 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


that is, the commutating field is inversely proportional to the 
square of the speed; for instance, at double synchronism it should 
be one-quarter as high as at synchronism, etc. 

201. Of the quadrature field, <!>', only that part is needed for 
commutation which enters and leaves the armature at the posi- 
tion of the brushes; that is, instead of producing a quadrature 
field, <!>', in accordance with equation (20), and distributed around 
the armature periphery in the same manner as the main field, ♦, 
but in quadrature position thereto, a local commutating field 
may be used at the brushes, and produced by a commutating 
pole or commutating coil, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 172 


Fig. 172. — Commutation with commutating poles. 

as K\ and K. The excitation of this commutating coil, A', then 
would have to be such as to give a magnetic air-gap density <B' 
relative to that of the main field, (B, by the same equations (19) 
and (20) : 


(B' = j(B { 


= *<)2 


(21) 


As the alternating flux of a magnetic circuit is proportional to 
the voltage which it consumes, that is, to the voltage impressed 
upon the magnetizing coil, and lags nearly 90° l>ehind it, the mag- 
netic flux of the commutating poles, K, can be produced by ener- 
gizing these poles by an e.m.f. e, which is varied with the speed 
of the motor, by equation: 


e = * (£) -, 
whore e„ is its proper value at synchronism. 


(22) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 359 

Since (B' lags 90° behind its supply voltage, e, and also lags 90° 
behind (B, by equation (2), and so behind the supply current 
and, approximately, the supply e.m.f. of the motor, the voltage, 
e, required for the excitation of the commutating poles is approxi- 
mately in phase with the supply voltage of the motor; that is, 
a part thereof can be used, and is varied with the speed of the 
motor. 

Perfect commutation, however, requires not merely the elimi-' 
nation of the short-circuit current under the brush, but requires 
a reversal of the load current in the armature coil during its 
passage under the commutator brush. To reverse the current, 
an e.m.f. is required proportional but opposite to the current and 
therefore with the main field; hence, to produce a reversing e.m.f. 
in the armature coil under the commutator brush a second com- 
mutating field is required, in phase with the main field and ap- 
proximately proportional thereto. 

The commutating field required by a single-phase commutator 
motor to give perfect commutation thus consists of a component 
in quadrature with the main field, or the neutralizing component, 
which eliminates the short-circuit current under the brush, and 
a component in phase with the main field, or the reversing com- 
ponent, which reverses the main current in the armature coil 
under the brush; and the resultant commutating field thus must 
lag behind the main field, and so approximately behind the sup- 
ply voltage, by somewhat less than 90°, and have an intensity 
varying approximately inversely proportional to the square of 
the speed of the motor. 

Of the different motor types discussed under IV, the series 
motors, 1 and 2, have no quadrature field, and therefore can be 
made to commutate satisfactorily only by the use of commutator 
leads, or by the addition of separate commutating poles. The 
inverted repulsion motor, 3, has a quadrature field, which de- 
creases with increase of speed, and therefore gives a better com- 
mutation than the series motors, though not perfect, as the quad- 
rature field does not have quite the right intensity. 

The repulsion motors, 4 and 5, have a quadrature field, lag- 
ging nearly 90° behind the main field, and thus give good com- 
mutation at those speeds at which the quadrature field has the 
right intensity for commutation. However, in the repulsion 
motor with secondary excitation, 5, the quadrature field is con- 
stant and independent of the speed, as constant supply voltage 


360 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

is impressed upim the commutating winding, C, which produces 
the quadrature field, and in the direct repulsion motor, 4, the 
quadrature field increases with the speed, as the voltage consumed 
by the main field F decreases, and that left for the compensating 
winding, C, thus increases with the speed, while to give proper 
commutating flux it should decrease with the square of the speed. 
It thus follows that the commutation of the repulsion motors 
improves with increase of speed, up to that speed where the 
quadrature field is just right for commutating field — which is 
about at synchronism — but above this speed the commutation 
rapily becomes poorer, due to the quadrature field being far in 
excess of that required for commutating. 

In the series repulsion motors, 6 and 7, a quadrature field also 
exfsts, just as in the repulsion motors, but this quadrature field 
depends upon that part of the total voltage which is impressed 
upon the commutating winding, C, and thus can be varied by 
varying the distribution of supply voltage between the two cir- 
cuits; hence, in this type of motor, the commutating flux can be 
maintained through all (higher) speeds by impressing the total 
voltage upon the compensating circuit and short-circuiting the 
armature circuit for all speeds up to that at which the required 
commutating flux has decreased to the quadrature, flux given by 
the motor, and from this speed upward only a part of the supply 
voltage, inversely proportional (approximately) to the square of 
the speed, is impressed upon the compensating circuit, the rest 
shifted over to the armature circuit. The difference between 
6 and 7 is that in 6 the armature circuit is more inductive, and 
the quadrature flux therefore lags less behind the main flux than 
in 7, and by thus using more or less of the field coil in the arma- 
ture circuit its inductivity can be varied, and therewith the 
phase displacement of the quadrature flux against, the main flux 
adjusted from nearly 90° lag to considerably less lag, hence not 
only the proper intensity but also the exact phase of the required 
commutating flux produced. 

As seen herefrom, the difference between the different motor 
types of IV is essentially found in their different actions regarding 
commutation. 

It follows herefrom that by the selection of the motor-type 
quadrature fluxes, *i, can be impressed upon the motor, as com- 
mutating flux, of intensities and phase displacements against 
the main flux, *, varying over a considerable range. The main 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 361 

advantage of the series-repulsion motor type is the possibility 
which this type affords, of securing the proper commutating 
field at all speeds down to that where the speed is too low to 
induce sufficient voltage of neutralization at the highest available 
commutating flux. 

VI. Motor Characteristics 

202. The single-phase commutator motor of varying speed or 
series characteristic comprises three circuits, the armature, the 
compensating winding, and the field winding, which are connected 
in series with each other, directly or indirectly. 

The impressed e.m.f. or supply voltage of the motor then con- 
sists of the components: 

1. The e.m.f. of rotation, eh or voltage generated in the arma- 
ture conductors by their rotation through the magnetic field, $. 
This voltage is in phase with the field, $>, and therefore approxi- 
mately with the current, i, that is, is power e.m.f., and is the 
voltage which does the useful work of the motor. It is propor- 
tional to the speed or frequency of rotation,/o, to the field strength, 
$, and to the number of effective armature turns, tii. 

«i = 2ir/0n1<i> 10"8. (23) 

The number of effective armature turns, nif with a distributed 
winding, is the projection of all the turns on their resultant direc- 
tion. With a full-pitch winding of n series turns from brush to 
brush, the effective number of turns thus is: 

♦* 2 

fii = m [avg cos] \ « m. (24) 

With a fractional-pitch winding of the pitch of r degrees, the 
effective number of turns is: 

fix = m [avg cos] / « m sin * (2/5) 

2. The e.m.f. of alternation of the field, e«, tliat is, the voltage 
generated in the field turns by the alternation of the magnetic 
flux, 4>, produced by them and thus enclosed by them. This vol- 
tage is in quadrature with the field flux, 4>, and thus approxi- 
mately with the current [, is proportional to tin* frequency of the 


362 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

impressed voltage, /, to the field strength, 4>, and to the number of 
field turns, n„. 

«o = 2jirfn0* 10~8. (26) 

3. The impedance voltage of the motor: 

e' = IZ (27) 

and: Z = r + jx, 

where r = total effective resistance of field coils, armature with 
commutator and brushes, and compensating winding, x = total 
self-inductive reactance, that is, reactance of the leakage flux of 
armature and compensating winding — or the stray flux passing 
locally between the armature and the compensating conductors 
— plus the self-inductive reactance of the field, that is, the reac- 
tance due to the stray field or flux passing between field coils 
and armature. 

In addition hereto, x comprises the reactance due to the quad- 
rature magnetic flux of incomplete compensation or overcom- 
pensation, that is, the voltage generated by the quadrature flux, 
$', in the difference between armature and compensating con- 
ductors, ni — n2 or n% — n\. 

Therefore the total supply voltage, Ey of the motor is: 

E = ei + e0 + e' 

= 2 irforii* 10-8 + 2jirfnx* lO"8 + (r + jx) /. (28) 

Let, then, R = magnetic reluctance of field circuit, thus 
j 

$ = ~tr = the magnetic field flux, when assuming this flux as in 
phase with the excitation /, and denoting: 

as the effective reactance of field inductance, corresponding to 
the e.m.f. of alternation: 


S = y = ratio of speed to frequency, or speed 
f as fraction of synchronism, 

Tit 

c = = ratio of effective armature turns to 
n° field turns; 


(31) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 363 

substituting (30) and (31) in (28): 

# = cSxol + jxol + (r + jx) I 

= [(r + cSxo) + j(x + x0)] I; (32) 

or: 

1 = (r + cSxo) + 7 (x + *o)' (33) 

and, in absolute values: 

t = , -_ — . • (34) 

V(r + cSxo)2 + (x + x0)2 

The power-factor is given by: 

tan * - 7T& (35) 

The useful work of the motor is done by the e.m.f. of rotation: 

#i = cSxof, 

and, since this e.m.f., #i, is in phase with the current, /, the 
useful work, or the motor output (inclusive friction, etc.), is: 

p = EJ = cSxoi2 

cSxoe2 


(r + cSxQ)2 + (x + xo)2 

and the torque of the motor is : 

p 

D = -~ = cxoi2 


(36) 


cxtf2 


(r + cSxo)2 + (x + xo)2 
For instance, let: 

e = 200 volts, c = — = 4, 

wo 


(37) 


then: 


Z =± r+jx = 0.02 + 0.06 j, x0 = 0.08; 
. 10,000 

1 " vu + i^2+49amp-' 

♦ a 1 + 16 S 
cot 0 = — =- > 

p = 32^0005 , 

(1 + 16 Sj2 "+ 49 ' 

n_ 32,000 , 

(1 + 16 S)2 + 49 Syn* kW* 


364 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

203. The behavior of the motor at different speeds is l*^t 
shown by plotting i, p = cos 8, P and D as ordinates with the 
speed, 8, as abscissae, as shown in Fig. 173. 

In railway practice, by a survival of the practice of former 
times, usually the constants are plotted with the current, /, as 
abscissae, as shown in Fig. 174, though obviously this arrange- 
ment does not as well illustrate the behavior of the motor. 

Graphically, by starting with the current, /, as zero axis,0/, the 
motor diagram is plotted in Fig. 175. 

£ 

^ 

II. 

P 

tl 

"S 

\ 

.. 

-1 

\ 


-, 

V 

\ 

ri. 

m 

A 

\ 

\ 

s 

„ 

TV 

/ 

\ 

V 

j» 

/ 

)f 

\ 

P 

-„ 

. 

/ 

\ 

s! 

mi 

■-- 

m 

/ 

"7 

1 

/ 

0 

mi 

in 

-JL 

a 

t 

8- 

. 

„ 

1 l'i 

. 

1 L5 1 

. 

1 
wit 
anc 
aim 

C 
tern 
EOi 

I 
the 

I 
flux 
by 

Fia. 173. — Bingle-phase commutator-motor spoori characteristics. 

he voltage consumed by the resistance, r, is OE, — ir. in pi 
l 01; the voltage consumed by the reactance, x, is OE, = 
90° ahead of 01. OE, and OE, combine to the voltage c 
ed by the motor impedance, OE' — iz. 
ombining OE' = iz, OE\ — eit and OE0 = c0 thus gives 
linal voltage, OE = e, of the motor, and the phase an 

= e. 

l this diagram, and in the preceding approximate calculat 
magnetic flux, *, has been assumed in phase with the curren 
l reality, however, the equivalent sine wave of magn 
$, lags behind the equivalent sine wave of exciting curren 
he angle of hysteresis lag, and still further by the po 

ase 
tx, 
on- 

the 

file, 

on, 
,/- 
etic 
,/. 
wcr 

SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


365 


consumed by eddy currents, and, especially in the commutator 
motor, by the power consumed in the short-circuit current under 
the brushes, and the vector,0*,therefore is behind the current 
vector, 01, by an angle a, which is small in a motor in which the 
short-circuit current under the brushes is eliminated and the 
eddy currents are negligible, but may reach considerable values 
in the motor of poor commutation. 


n„ 

" r 

" I 

\ 

" g / .r. 

" \ ■£/«•' 

u -^ -, ». f- 

" V? 7 

d.. ~~"S_^ -l X m 

Z i C5^ ' j H: 

-/ V ^ \--T 

7 K , V \ 


04 DZ ^ \A-»- 

7 s \"Z 

. ^ i- \ ■ 

M 30 3OT aio MOWI ^Twu W KOI* 1500 i: MlN 

Fio. 174. — Single-phase commutator-motor current characteristics. 


Assuming then, in Fig. 176, 0* lagging behind 01 by angle 
a, OEi is in phase with 0*, hence lagging behind 01; that is, 
the e.m.f. of rotation is not entirely a power e.m.f., but contains 
a wattless lagging component. The e.m.f. of alternation, OE0, 
is 90° ahead of O*, hence less than 90° ahead of OI, and therefore 
contains a power component representing the power consumed 
by hysteresis, eddy currents, and the short-circuit current under 
the brushes. 

Completing now the diagram, it is seen that Hie phase angle, 9, 
is reduced, that is, the power-factor of the motor increased by 


366 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


the increased loss of power, but is far greater than corresponding 
thereto. It is the result of the lag of the e.m.f. of rotation, which 
produces a lagging e.m.f. component partially compensating for 
the leading e.m.f. consumed by self -inductance, a lag of the e.m.f. 
being equivalent to a lead of the current. 


Fig. 175. — Single-phase commutator-motor vector diagram. 

As the result of this feature of a lag of the magnetic flux, $, 
by producing a lagging e.m.f. of rotation and thus compensating 
for the lag of current by self-inductance, single-phase motors 
having poor commutation usually have better power-factors, and 


Fig. 176. — Single-phase commutator-motor diagram with phase displace- 
ment between flux and current. 

improvement in commutation, by eliminating or reducing the 
short-circuit current under the brush, usually causes a slight de- 
crease in the power-factor, by bringing the magnetic flux, <f>, more 
nearly in phase with the current, /. 

204. Inversely, by increasing the lag of the magnetic flux, <t>, 
the phase angle can bo decrejised .and the power-factor improved. 
Such a shift of the magnetic flux, 4>, behind the supply current, ?, 
can be produced by dividing the current, i, into components, i' 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 367 

and i", and using the lagging component for field excitation. 
This is done most conveniently by shunting the field by a non- 
inductive resistance. Let r0 be the non-inductive resistance in 
shunt with the field winding, of reactance, xQ + x\f where X\ is 


Fig. 177. — Single-phase commutator-motor improvement of power-factor 

by introduction of lagging e.m.f. of rotation. 

that part of the self-inductive reactance, x, due to the field coils. 

The current, i', in the field is lagging 90° behind the current, i", 

in a non-inductive resistance, and the two currents have the 
•# 

ratio .,-, = — -7- — ; hence, dividing the total current, 01 , in this 

* Xo T ^1 

proportion into the two quadrature components, OF and 01" > 


Fig. 178. — Single-phase commutator motor. Unity power-factor produced 

by lagging e.m.f. of rotation. 

in Fig. 177, gives the magnetic flux, 0$, in phase with 01', and 
so lagging behind 01, and then the e.m.f. of rotation is OEh the 
e.m.f. of alternation OE0) and combining 0Eh OE0) and OE' 


368 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

gives the impressed e.ra.f., OE, nearer in phase to 01 than with 
0* in phase with 01. 

In this manner, if the e.m.fa, of self-inductance arc not CM 
large, unity power-factor can be produced, as shown in Fig. 178. 

Let 01 = total current, OE' = impedance voltage of the 
motor, OE = impressed e.m.f. or supply voltage, and assumed 
in phase with 01. OE then must be the resultant of OE' and of 
OEi, the voltage of rotation plus that of alternation, and resolv- 
ing therefore 0E% into two components, 0E% and 0Ea, in quadra- 


ture with each other, and proportional respectively to the e.m.f. 
of rotation and the e.m.f. of alternation, gives the magnetic flux, 
0*, in phase with the e.m.f. of rotation, 0EU and the component 
of current in the field, 01', and in the non-inductive resistance-, 
01", in phase and in quadrature respectively with 04>, which 
combined make up the total current. The projection of the 
e.m.f. of rotation 0E\ on 01 then is the power component of 
the e.m.f., which does the work of the motor, and the quadra- 
ture projection of, 0Et, is the compensating component of the 
e.m.f. of rotation, which neutralizes the wattless component of 
the e.m.f. of self-inductance. 

Obviously such a compensation involves some loss of power 
in the non-inductive resistance, ra, shunting the field coils, and as 
the power-factor of the motor usually is sufficiently high, such 
compensation is rarely needed. 

In motors in which some of the circuits are connected induct ively 
in series with the others the diagram is essentially thesame, except 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 369 

that a phase displacement exists between the secondary and the 
primary current. The secondary current, Ii, of the transformer 
lags behind the primary current, Jo, slightly less than 180° ; that is, 
considered in opposite direction, the secondary current leads the 
primary by a small angle, 0o, and in the motors with secondary 
excitation the field flux, 4>, being in phase with the field current, 
1 1 (or lagging by angle a behind it), thus leads the primary 
current, Jo, by angle 0O (or angle do — a). As a lag of the mag- 
netic flux $ increases, and a lead thus decreases the power-factor, 
motors with secondary field excitation usually have a slightly 


Fig. 180. — Single-phase commutator motor with secondary excitation 
power-factor improved by shunting field winding with non-inductive 
circuit. 


lower power-factor than motors with primary field excitation, 
and therefore, where desired, the power-factor may be improved 
by shunting the field with a non-inductive resistance, r0. Thus 

for instance, if, in Fig. 179, 01 0 = primary current, 01 \ = sec- 
ondary current, OEi, in phase with 01 1, is the e.m.f. of rotation, 
in the case of the secondary field excitation, and OEo, in quadra- 
ture ahead of 01 1, is the e.m.f. of alternation, while OE' is the 
impedance voltage, and OEi, OEo and OE' combined give the 

supply voltage, OE, and EOI = 0 the angle of lag. 

Shunting the field by a non-inductive resistance, r0, and thus 

resolving the secondary current OI\ into the components OI\ in 

the field and 01" \ in the non-inductive resistance, gives the dia- 
gram Fig. 180, where a = I'iO$ = angle of lag of magnetic 
field. 

24 


370 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

205. The action of the commutator in an alternating-eurreri 
motor, in permitting compensation for phase displacement iwl 

thus allowing a control of the power-factor, is very imn. ■-m-.- 
and important, and can also be used in other types of machines, 
as induction motors am! alternators, by supplying these machines 
with a commutator for phase control. 

A lag of the current is the same as a lead of the e.m.f., and in- 
versely a leading current inserted into a circuit has the same ef- 
fect as a lagging e.m.f. inserted. The commutator, however 
produces an e.m.f. in phase with the current. Inciting the field 
l>y a lagging current in the field, a lagging e.m.f. of rotation is 
produced which is equivalent to a leading current. As it is easy 
to produce a lagging current by self-inductance, the commutator 
thus affords an easy means of producing the equivalent of a 
leading current. Therefore, the alternating-current commutator 
is one of the important methods of compensating for lagging: 
currents. Other methods are the use of electrostatic or electro- 
lytic condensers and of overexcited synchronous machines. 

Based on this principle, a number of designs of induction 
motors and other apparatus have been developed, using Qm 
commutator for neutralizing the lagging magnetizing current 
and the lag caused by self-inductance, and thereby produdng 
unity power-factor or even leading currents. So far, however, 
none of them has come into extended use. 

This feature, however, explains the very high power-factor* 
feasible in single-phase commutator motors even with COQndtf 
able air gaps, far larger than feasible in induction motors. 

VII. Efficiency and Losses 

206. The losses in single-phase commutator motors ate BOB ' 
tially the same as in other types of machines: 

(a) Friction losses— air friction or windage, lwaring friction 
and commutator brush friction, and also ■ :■ . 
mechanical transmission losses. 

(6) Core losses, as hysteresis and eddy currents. These an1 
of two classes — the alternating core hiss, due to the alternation 
of the magnetic flux in the main field, quadrature field, and arma- 
ture and the rotating core loss, due to the rotation of the arma- 
ture; through the magnetic field. The former depends upon the 
frequency, the latter upon the speed. 

(cj Commutation losses, as the power consumed by the slum- 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 371 

circuit current under the brush, by arcing and sparking, where 
such exists. 

(d) ihr losses in the motor circuits — the field coils, the compen- 
sating winding, the armature and the brush contact resistance. 

(e) Load losses, mainly represented by an effective resistance, 
that is, an increase of the total effective resistance of the motor 
beyond the ohmic resistance. 

Driving the motor by mechanical power and with no voltage 
on the motor gives the friction and the windage losses, exclusive 
of commutator friction, if the brushes are lifted off the commu- 
tator, inclusive, if the brushes are on the commutator. Ener- 
gizing now the field by an alternating current of the rated fre- 
quency, with the commutator brushes off, adds the core losses 
to the friction losses; the increase of the driving power theto 
measures the rotating core loss, while a wattmeter in the field 
exciting circuit measures the alternating core loss. 

Thus the alternating core loss is supplied by the impressed 
electric power, the rotating core loss by the mechanical driving 
power. 

Putting now the brushes down on the commutator adds the 
commutation losses. 

The ohmic resistance gives the i2r losses, and the difference 
between the ohmic resistance and the effective resistance, calcu- 
lated from wattmeter readings with alternating current in the 
motor circuits at rest and with the field unexcited, represents 
the load losses. 

However, the different losses so derived have to be corrected 
for their mutual effect. For instance, the commutation losses 
are increased by the current in the armature; the load losses are 
less with the field excited than without, etc. ; so that this method 
of separately determining the losses can give only an estimate of 
their general magnitude, but the exact determination of the effi- 
ciency is best carried out by measuring electric input and me- 
chanical output. 

VIII. Discussion of Motor Types 

207. Varying-speed single-phase commutator motors can be 
divided into two classes, namely, compensated series motors and 
repulsion motors. In the former, the main supply current is 
through the armature, while in the latter the armature is closed 
upon itself as secondary circuit, with the compensating winding 


372 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


as primary or supply circuit. As the result hereof the repulsion 
motors contain a transformer flux, in quadrature position to the 
main flux, and lagging behind it, while in the series motors no 
such lagging quadrature flux exists, but in quadrature position 
to the main flux, the flux either is zero — complete compensation 
■ — or in phase with the main flux — over- or undercompensation. 

A. Compensated Series Motors 

Series motors give the best power-factors, with the exreptioii 
of those motors in which by increasing the lag of the field flux 
a compensation for power-factor is produced, as discussed in V. 
The commutation of the series motor, however, is equally poor 
at all speeds, due to the absence of any eommutating flux, and 
with the exception of very small sizes such motors therefore are 
inoperative without the use of either resistance leads or eom- 
mutating poles. With high-resistance leads, however, fair opera- 
tion is secured, though obviously not of the same class with 
that of the direct-current motor; with eommutating poles or coils 
producing a local quadrature flux at the brushes good results 
have been produced abroad. 

Of the two types of compensation, conductive compensation. 
1, with the compensating winding connected in series with the 
armature, and inductive compensation, 2, with the compensated 
winding short-circuited upon itself, inductive compensation nec- 
essarily is always complete or practically complete compensa- 
tion, while with conductive compensation a reversing flux can 
be produced at the brushes by overcompensation, and the com- 
mutation thus somewhat improved, especially at speed, at (fat 
sacrifice, however, of the power-factor, which is lowered by the 
increased self-inductance of the compensating winding. On the 
short-circuit current under the brushes, due to the e.m.f. of alter- 
nation, such overcompensation obviously has no helpful effect. 
Inductive compensation has the advantage that the compen- 
sating winding is not connected with the supply circuit, can I* 
made of very low voltage, or even of individually short-circuited 
turns, and therefore larger conductors and less insulation used, 
which results in an economy of spaee, and therewith an infix Hfld 
output for the same size of motor. Therefore inductive compttf- 
satiou is preferable where it can be used. It is not permissible, 
however, in motors which are required to operate also on direct 
current, since with direct-current supply no induction takes place 


.1IXGLB-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


373 


and therefore the compensation fails, and with the high ratio of 
armature turns to field turns, without compensation, the field 
distortion is altogether too large to give satisfactory commutation, 
except in small motors. 

The inductively compensated series motor with secondary ex- 
citation, or inverted repulsion motor, 3, takes an intermediary 
position between the series motors and the repulsion motors; it 
is a series motor in so far as the armature is in the main supply 
circuit, but magnetically it has repulsion-motor characteristics, 
that is, contains a lagging quadrature flux. As the field exci- 
tation consumes considerable voltage, when supplied from the 
compensating winding as secondary circuit, considerable voltage 
must he generated in this winding, thus giving a corresponding 
transformer flux. With increasing speed and therewith decreas- 
ing current, the voltage consumed by the field coils decreases, 
and therewith the transformer flux which generates this voltage. 
Therefore, the inverted repulsion motor contains a transformer 
flux which has approximately the intensity and the phase re- 
quired for commutation; it lags behind the main flux, but less 
than 90°, thus contains a component in phase with the main 
flux, as reversing flux, and decreases with increase of speed. 
Therefore, the commutation of the inverted repulsion motor is 
very good, far superior to the ordinary series motor, and it can 
be operated without resistance leads; it has, however, the serious 
objection of a poor power-factor, resulting from the lead of the 
field flux against the armature current, due to the secondary ex- 
citation, as discussed in V. To make such a motor satisfactory 
in power-factor requires a non-inductive shunt across the field, 
and thereby a waste of power. For this reason it has not come 
into commercial use. 

B. Repulsion Motors 
208. Repulsion motors are characterized by a lagging quadra- 
ture flux, which transfers the power from the compensating wind- 
ing to the armature. At standstill, and at very low speeds, re- 
pulsion motors and series motors are equally unsatisfactory in 
commutation; while, however, in the series motors the commu- 
tation remains bad (except when using commutating devices), 
in the repulsion motors with increasing speed the commutation 
rapidly improves, and becomes perfect near synchronism. As 
the result hereof, under average conditions a much inferior com- 


374 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

mutation can be allowed in repulsion motors at. very low speeds 
than in series motors, since in the former the period of poor 
commutation lasts only a very short time. While, therefore, 
series motors can not be satisfactorily operated Hit hoot resist a m.-e 
leads (or commutating poles), in repulsion motors peristanofl 
leads are not necessary and not used, and the excessive current 
density under the brushes in the moment of starting permitted, 
as it lasts too short a time to cause damage to the commutator. 

As the transformer field of the repulsion motor is approximately 
constant, while the proper commutating field should decrease 
with the square of the speed, above synchronism the transformer 
field is too large for commutation, and at speeds considerably 
above synchronism — 50 per cent, and more — the repulsion motor 
becomes inoperative because of excessive sparking. At syn- 
chronism, the magnetic field of the repulsion motor is a rotating 
field, like that of the polyphase induction motor. 

Where, therefore, speeds far above synchronism are required, 
the repulsion motor can not be used; but where synchronous 
speed is not much exceeded the repulsion motor is preferred be- 
cause of its superior commutation. Thus when using a commu- 
tator as auxiliary device for starting single- phase induction 
motors the repulsion-motor type is used. For high frequencies. 
as 60 cycles, where peripheral speed forbids synchronism being 
greatly exceeded, the repulsion motor is the type to be considers! 

Repulsion motors also may be built with primary and str- 
ondary excitation. The latter usually gives a lietter commuta- 
tion, because of the lesser lag of the transformer flux, and i here- 
with a greater in-phase component, that is, greater reversing flux, 
especially at high speeds. Secondary excitation, however, gives 
a slightly lower power-factor. 

A combination of the repulsion-motor and series-motor types 
is the series repulsion motor, 6 and 7. In this only a part of 
the supply voltage is impressed upon the conqx-nsating winding 
and thus transformed to the armature, while the rest of the sup- 
ply voltage is impressed directly upon the armature, just as in 
the series motor. As result thereof the transformer flux of tin1 
series repulsion motor is less than that of the repulsion motor. 
in the same proportion in which the voltage impressed upon the 
compensating winding is less than the total supply voltage. 
Such a motor, therefore, reaches equality of the transformer flux 
with the commutating flux, and gives perfect commutation at a 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 375 

higher speed than the repulsion motor, that is, above synchron- 
ism. With-the total supply voltage impressed upon the compen- 
sating winding, the transformer flux equals the commutating 
flux at synchronism. At n times synchronous speed the com- 
mutating flux should be — 2 of what it is at synchronism, and by 

IV 

impressing —^ of the supply voltage upon the compensating wind- 

IV 

ing, the rest on the armature, the transformer flux is reduced 
to —j of its value, that is, made equal to the required commuta- 

ting flux at n times synchronism. 

In the series repulsion motor, by thus gradually shifting the 
supply voltage from the compensating winding to the armature 
and thereby reducing the transformer flux, it can be maintained 
equal to the required commutating flux at all speeds from syn- 
chronism upward; that is, the series repulsion motor arrange- 
ment permits maintaining the perfect commutation, which the 
repulsion motor has near synchronism, for all higher speeds. 

With regard to construction, no essential difference exists be- 
tween the different motor types, and any of the types can be 
operated equally well on direct current by connecting all three 
circuits in series. In general, the motor types having primary 
and secondary circuits, as the repulsion and the series repulsion 
motors, give a greater flexibility, as they permit winding the 
circuits for different voltages, that is, introducing a ratio of trans- 
formation between primary and secondary circuit. Shifting one 
motor element from primary to secondary, or inversely, then 
gives the equivalent of a change of voltage or change of turns, 
Thus a repulsion motor in which the stator is wound for a higher 
voltage, that is, with more turns, than the rotor or armature, 
when connecting all the circuits in series for direct-current opera- 
tion, gives a direct-current motor having a greater field excita- 
tion compared with the armature reaction, that is, the stronger 
field which is desirable for direct-current operating but not per- 
missible with alternating current. 

209. In general, tthe constructve differences between motor 
types are mainly differences in connection of the three circuits. 
For instacne, let F = field circuit, A = armature circuit, C = 
compensating circuit, T = supply transformer, R = resistance 
used in starting and at very low speeds. Connecting, in Fig. 181, 
the armature, A, between field F and compensate" Ending, C. 


376 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


With switch 0 open the starting resistance is in circuit . dofBO| 
switch 0 short-circuits the starting resistance and gives the run- 
ning conditions of the motor. 

With all the other switches open the motor is a conductively 

compensated series motor. 


Fia. ] 


raged to operate 


Closing 1 gives the inductively compensated series motor. 
Closing 2 gives the repulsion motor with primary excitation. 
Closing 3 gives the repulsion motor with secondary excitation. 
Closing 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 gives the successive speed steps of the 
scries repulsion motor with armature excitation. 


opanta 


Connecting, in Fig. 182, the field, F, between armature, .1 , ud 
compensating winding, C, the resistance, R, is again controlled by 

switch 0. 

All other switches open gives the conductively compensated 
series motor. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


377 


Switch 1 closed gives the inductively compensated series 
motor. 

Snitch 2 closed gives the inductively compensated series 
motor with secondary excitation, or inverted repulsion motor. 

Switch 3 closed gives the repulsion motor with primary 
excitation. 

Switches 4 to 7 give the different speed steps of the series re- 
pulsion motor with primary excitation. 

Opening the connection at x and closing at y (as shown in 
dotted tine), the steps 3 to 7 give respectively the repulsion motor 
with secondary excitation and the successive steps of the series 
repulsion motor with armature excitation. 

Still further combinations can be produced in this manner, as 
for instance, in Fig. 181, by closing 2 and 4, but leaving 0 open, 
the field, F, is connected across a constant- potential supply, in 
series with resistance, R, while the armature also receives con- 
stant voltage, and the motor then approaches a finite speed, that 
is, has shunt motor characteristic, and in starting, the main 
field, F, and the quadrature field, AC, are displaced in phase, so 
give a rotating or polyphase field (unsymmetrical). 

To discuss all these motor types with their in some instances 
very interesting characteristics obviously is not feasible. In 
general, they can all be classified under series motor, repulsion 
motor, shunt motor, and polyphase induction motor, and com- 
binations thereof. 

IX. Other Commutator Motors 

210. Single-phase commutator motors have been developed as 
varying-spced motors for railway service. In other directions 
commutators have been applied to alternating-current motors 
and such motors developed : 

(a) For limited speed, or of the shunt-motor type, that is, 
motors of similar characteristic as the single-phase railway 
motor, except that the speed does not indefinitely increase with 
decreasing load but approaches a finite no-load value. Several 
types of such motors have been developed, as stationary motors 
for elevators, variable-speed machinery, etc., usually of the 
single-phase type. 

By impressing constant voltage upon the field the magnetic 
field flux is constant, and the speed thus reaches a finite limiting 
value at which the e.in.f. of rotation of the armature through 


378 


ELECTRICAL APPARA TVS 


the constant field flux consumes the impressed voltagi 
armature. By changing the voltage supply to the field different 
speeds can be produced, that is, an adjustable-speed motor. 
The main problem in the design of such motors is to get the 
field excitation in phase with the armature current and thus pro- 
duce a good power-factor. 

(b) Adjustable-speed polyphase induction motors. In the 
secondary of the polyphase induction motor an e.m.f. is gener- 
ated which, at constant impressed e.m.f. and therefore apprffld- 
mately constant flux, is proportional to the slip from synchron- 
ism. With short-circuited secondary the motor closely ap- 
proaches synchronism. Inserting resistance into the secondary 
reduces the speed by the voltage consumed in the secondary. 
As this is proportional to the current and thus to the load, the 
speed control of the polyphase induction motor by resistance in 
the secondary gives a speed which varies with the load, just M 
the speed control of a direct-current motor by resistance in tin- 
armature circuit ; hence, the speed is not constant, and the opera- 
tion at lower speeds inefficient. Inserting, however, a con&taitf 
voltage into the secondary of the induction motor the speed is 
decreased if this voltage is in opposition, and is increased if this 
voltage is in the same direction as the secondary generated e.m.f., 
and in this manner a speed control can be produced. If c = 
voltage inserted into the secondary, as fraction of the voltage 
which would be induced in it at full frequency by the rotating 
field, then the polyphase induction motor approaches at no-load 
and runs at load near to the speed (1 — c) or (1 + c) times syn- 
chronism, depending upon the direction of the inserted voltage. 

Such a voltage inserted into the induction-motor secondary 
must, however, have the frequency of the motor secondary cur- 
rents, that is, of slip, and therefore can be derived from the full- 
frequency supply circuit only by a commutator revolving with 
the secondary, If cf is the frequency of slip, then (1 — c)f is 
the frequency of rotation, and thus the frequency of commuter 
tion, and at frequency, /, impressed upon the commutator the 
effective frequency of the eommutated current is/ — (1 — c)/ = 
cf, or the frequency of slip, as required. 

Thus the commutator affords a means of inserting voltage 
into the secondary of induction motors and thus varying its 
spetd. 

However, while these eommutated currents in their resultant 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 379 

give the effect of the frequency of slip, they actually consist of 
sections of waves of full frequency, that is, meet the full station- 
ary impedance in the rotor secondary, and not the very much 
lower impedance of the low-frequency currents in the ordinary 
induction motor. 

If, therefore, the brushes on the commutator are set so that 
the inserted voltage is in phase with the voltage generated in the 
secondary, the power-factor of the motor is very poor. Shifting 
the brushes, by a phase displacement between the generated and 
the inserted voltage, the secondary currents can be made to lead, 
and thereby compensate for the lag due to self-inductance and 
unity power-factor produced. This, however, is the case only 
at one definite load, and at all other loads either overcompensa- 
tion or undercompensation takes place, resulting in poor power- 
factor, either lagging or leading. Such a polyphase adjustable- 
speed motor thus requires shifting of the brushes with the load 
or other adjustment, to maintain reasonable power-factor, and 
for this reason has not been used. 

(c) Power-factor compensation. The production of an alter- 
nating magnetic flux requires wattless or reactive volt-amperes, 
which are proportional to the frequency. Exciting an induction 
motor not by the stationary primary but by the revolving sec- 
ondary, which has the much lower frequency of slip, reduces the 
volt-amperes excitation in the proportion of full frequency to 
frequency of slip, that is, to practically nothing. This can be done 
by feeding the exciting current into the secondary by commuta- 
tor. If the secondary contains no other winding but that con- 
nected to the commutator, the motor gives a poor power-factor. 
If, however, in addition to the exciting winding, fed by the com- 
mutator, a permanently short-circuited winding is used, as a 
squirrel-cage winding, the exciting impedance of the former is 
reduced to practically nothing by the short-circuit winding coin- 
cident with it, and so by overexcitation unity power-factor or 
even leading current can be produced. The presence of the short- 
circuited winding, however, excludes this method from speed 
control, and such a motor (Heyland motor) runs near synchron- 
ism just as the ordinary induction motor, differing merely by the 
power-factor. Regarding hereto see Chapter on "Induction 
Motors with Secondary Excitation." 

This method of excitation by feeding the alternating current 
through a commutator into the rotor has been used very success- 


380 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

fully abroad in the so-called "compensated repulsion motor" of 
Winter-Eichberg. This motor differs from the ordinary repul- 
sion motor merely by the field coil. F, in Fig. 183 being replaced 
by a set of exciting brushes, G, in Fig. 184, at right angles to the 
main brushes of the armature, that is, located so that the m_mJ. 
of the current between the brushes, G, magnetizes in the same 


D 


_± 


Fig. 1*3. — Plain repulsion motor. 

direction as the field coils. F, in Fig. 1S3. Usually the exciting 
brushes are supplied by a transformer or autotransfonner. so as 
to vary the excitation and thereby the speed. 

This arrangement then lowers the e.mJ. of self-inductance of 
field excitation of the motor from that corresponding to full fre- 


C_ 


qoency in the ordinary repulsion motor to that cc the frequency 
of sop. hence to a negative value above syririmrJsn: so that 
hereby a compensation for lagging current ;*r he produced 
above synchronism, and unity power-dacKc cc even leading 
currents produced. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 381 


211. Theoretical Investigation. — In its most general form, the 
single-phase commutator motor, as represented by Fig. 185, 
comprises: two armature or rotor circuits in quadrature with 
each other, the main, or energy, and the exciting circuit of the 
armature where such exists, which by a multisegmental commu- 
tator are connected to two sets of brushes in quadrature position 
with each other. These give rise to two short-circuits, also in 
quadrature position with each other and caused respectively by 
the main and by the exciting brushes. Two stator circuits, the 


field, or exciting, and the cross, or compensating circuit, also in 

quadrature with each other, and in line respectively with, the 

exciting and, the main armature circuit. 

These circuits may be separate, or may be parts or components 

of the same circuit. They may be massed together in a single 

slot of the magnetic structure, or may be distributed over the 

whole periphery, as frequently done with the armature windings, 

and then as their effective number of turns must be considered 

their vector resultant, that is: 

2 , 


n = -n 

7T 


where n' = actual number of turns in series between the arma- 
ture brushes, and distributed over the whole periphery, that is, 
an arc of 180° electrical. Or the windings of the circuit may be 
distributed only over an arc of the periphery of angle, w, as 
frequently the case with the compensating winding distributed 
in the pole face of pole arc, w ; or with fractional-pitch armature 
windings of pitch, w. In this case, the effective number of turns 


is: 


2 . . a) 
n = - n sin « 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


where n' with a fractional-pitch armature winding i: 
of series turns in the pitch angle, w, that is: 


n" being the number of turns in series between the brushes, dun 
in the spaed (*■ — w) outside of the pitch angle the armature 
conductors neutralize each other, that is, conductors curryine 
current in opposite direction arc superposed upon each other. 
See fractional-pitch windings, chapter "Commutating Machine," 
"Theoretical Elements of Electrical Engineering." 

212. Let: 

Bo, /o, Za = impressed voltage, current, and self-inductive 
impedance of the magnetizing or exciter circuit of stator (field 
coils), reduced to the rotor energy circuit by the ratio of effective 
turns, Cn, 

Ei, I,, Zi = impressed voltage, current and self-inductive im- 
pedance of the rotor energy circuit (or circuit at right angles 
to /„), 

Et, It, Zt = impressed voltage, current and self-inductive im- 
pedance of the stator compensating circuit (or circuit parallel to 
/l) reduced to the rotor circuit by the ratio of effective turn*, - ■.. 

fia, t», Z\ = impressed voltage, current'and self-inductive im- 
pedance of the exciting circuit of the rotor, or circuit parafld 
to/„, 

It, Zt = current and self-inductive impedance of the short- 
circuit under the brushes, /,, reduced to the rotor cireuit, 

h, /... = current and self-inductive impedance of the short- 
circuit under the brushes, /B, reduced to the rotor circuit. 

Z = mutual impedance of field excitation, that is, in the direc- 
tion of h, /,, /,, 

Z' = mutual impedance of armature reaction, that, is, in the 
direction of /,, I,, /&. 

Z' usually either equals Z, or is smaller than Z. 

Ii and Ia are very small, Z, and Z& very large quantities. 

Let S = speed, as fraction of synchronism. 

Using then the general equations "Chapter XIX, which ftpplji 
to any alternating-current circuit revolving with speed, S, bhnmgjb 
a magnetic field energized by alternating-current circuits, gives 
for the six circuits of the general single-phase commutator motor 
the six equations: 


SIXGLE-PUASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 383 


G o = ZJb + Z (/ 
E , = Z,/, + Z' (/ 
& = Z-/- + Z' (/ 

£* - Zl/, + Z (/; 

o = ZJ4 + Z (/ 
o = Z>h + Z' (/. 


+ /i - W, (1) 

+ A - W - J'SZ (/• + /. - /«>, (2) 

- /i - W, (3) 
+ /o - A> - jSZ v /« - /» - h\ (4) 

- /o - /,) - jSZ tf. + /* - f,\ (5) 
+ /i - /») - JSZ (h + /. - M. 16) 


These six equations contain ten variables: 

/o, /it /•* lit /i, Is, £o, £l, £2, £Y 

and so leave four independent variables, that is, four conditions, 
which may be chosen. < 

Properly choosing these four conditions, and substituting them 
into the six equations (1) to (6), so determines all ten variables. 
That is, the equations of practically all single-phase commutator 
motors are contained as special cases in above equations, and 
derived therefrom, by substituting the four conditions, which 
characterize the motor. 

Let then, in the following, the reduction factors to the arma- 
ture circuit, or the ratio of effective turns of a circuit, t , to the 
effective turns of the armature circuit, be represented by 0*. 
That is, 

number of effective turns of circuit, i 
number of effective turns of armature circuit* 

and if #,, /,, Z» are voltage, current and impedance of circuit, i, 

reduced to the armature circuit, then the actual voltage, current 

and impedance of circuit, i, are: 

/. 
d$i} * cc Zi. 

213. The different forms of single-phase commutator motors, 
of series characteristic are, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 
186: 

1. Series motor: 

e = c0#o + -Pi; h = Colx] h = 0; /3 = 0. 

2. Conduetively compensated series motor (Eickcmeyer 
motor) : 

e = c0#o + #i + c2#2; h = co/i; /2 = c2/i; h = 0. 

3. Inductively compensated series motor (Eickcmeyer motor) : 

e = coEq + Pi; #2 = 0; /o = c0/i; /3 = 0. 


384 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


4. Inverted repulsion motor, or series motor with secondary 
excitation : 

e = #1; cqE0 + c2E2 = 0; c2/o = c0/2; It = 0. 

5. Repulsion motor (Thomson motor) : 

e = c0#o + c2#2; #1 = 0; C2I0 = coA; It = 0. 

6. Repulsion motor with secondary excitation: 

c = c2#2; co#> + #1 = 0; lo = co/i; It = 0. 


Fig. 186. 


7. Series repulsion motor with secondary excitation : 

ei = co#o + #i;.e2 = #2; h = c0/i; /s = 0. 

8. Series repulsion motor with primary excitation (Alexander- 
sen motor) : 

ei = #1; e2 = c0#o + c2#2; c2/0 = c0/2; Js = 0. 

9. Compensated repulsion motor (Winter and Eichberg 
motor) : 


e = C2E2 + cz$z; gi = 0; /0 = 0; C3/2 = c2/3. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 385 


/m 


Fig. 187. 


10. Rotor-excited series motor with conductive compensation : 

e = & + cj#2 + c8#3; U = c2/i; h = ci/ij /o = 0. 

11. Rotor-excited series motor with inductive compensation: 

. e = & + c,#3; ft - 0; /o = 0; /, - c3/i. 

Numerous other combinations can be made and have been 
proposed. 

All of these motors have series characteristics, that is, a speed 
increasing with decrease of load. 

(1) to (8) contain only one set of 
brushes on the armature; (9) to (11) 
two sets of brushes in quadrature. 

Motors with shunt characteristic, 
that is, a speed which does not vary 
greatly with the load, and reaches such 
a definite limiting value at no-load 
that the motor can be considered a constant-speed motor, can 
also be derived from the above equations. For instance: 

Compensated shunt motor (Fig. 187) : 

#1 = 0; caft = c8#3 = e; /o = 0. 

In general, a series characteristic results, if the field-exciting 
circuit and the armature energy circuit are connected in series 
with each other directly or inductively, or related to each other 
so that the currents in the two circuits are more or less propor- 
tional to each other. Shunt characteristic results, if the voltage 
impressed upon the armature energy circuit, and the field excita- 
tion, or rather the magnetic field flux, whether produced or in- 
duced by the internal reactions of the- motor, are constant, or, 
more generally, proportional to each other. 

ReptUtsion Motor 

As illustration of the application of these general equations, 
paragraph 212, may be considered the theory of the repulsion 
motor (5), in Fig. 180. 

214. Assuming in the following the armature of the repulsion 
motor as short-circuited upon itself, and applying to the motor 
the equations (1) to ((>), the four conditions characteristic of the 
repulsion motor are: 

25 


386 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

1. Armature short-circuited upon itself. Hence: 

2. Field circuit and cross-circuit in series with each other con- 
nected to a source of impressed voltage, e. Hence, assuming 
the compensating circuit or cross-circuit of the same number of 
effective turns as the rotor circuit, or, c% = 1 : 

Cq$0 + #2 = e. 

Herefrom follows: 

3. io == CqI 2. 

4. No armature excitation used, but only one set of commu- 
tator brushes; hence: 

/•-0f 
and therefore: 

/6 = 0. 

Substituting these four conditions in the six equations (1) to 
(6), gives the three repulsion motor equations: 
Primary circuit: 

Z2/2 + Z' (h - /1) + Co2Zo/2 + CoZ (co/2 - h) = e; (7) 
Secondary circuit: 

Zxh + Z' (h - h) - jSZ (co/2 - I a) = 0; (8) 

Brush short-circuit: 

Z4/4 + Z(h- coh) - jSZ'ih - /,) = 0; (9) 

Substituting now the abbreviations: 

Z2 + co2 (Z0 + Z) = Z8, (10) 

(ID 
(12) 


Z' 

z 

"A, 

zx 

Z' 

= K 

z\ 

z 

, + z 

= X4; 

(13) 

where Xi and X«, especially the former, are small quantities. 
From (9) then follows: 

h = X4 1/, (c, - jSA) + jShA } ; (14) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 387 
from (8) follows, by substituting (14) and rearranging: 

' ' - '• 1 + x, - x,s< 

and, substituting (15) in (14), gives: 

t _x r (co-i5A)(l + X,-X4-S*)+jSA-S»co-Xij,S(-SA + jiCo) 

/« - Wi ! q: Xi - ^ » 

or, canceling terms of secondary order in the numerator: 

'• - k'''TTT^?> <I6) 

Equation (7) gives, substituting (10) and rearranging: 

h (Z, + Z') - hZ' - 74coZ = 6. (17) 

Substituting (15) and (16) herein, and rearranging, gives: 
Primary Current: 

_e(l+X, -_S%) , 

#2 = ^ > (18) 

where: 

# = (i43-iSco)+X1(A3+4)-X4(SJi43-S2Co+co2-jSco), (19) 

and: 

a, = |8; (20) 

or, since approximately: 

Az = Co2, (21) 

it is: 

X = (4, - jSco) + Xi (c«2 + A) - X4C0 (Co - j/S). (22) 

Substituting (18), (19), (20) in (15) and (16), gives: 
Secondary Current: 

.{.+*»- **(* + fl } 
'' ZK 

Brush Short-circuit Current: 


(23) 


/4 = x««oU-.s*). (24) 


388 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

As seen, for S = 1, or at synchronism, J \ = 0, that is, the 
short-circuit current under the commutator brushes of the re- 
pulsion motor disappears at synchronism, as was to be expected, 
since the armature coils revolve synchronously in a rotating field. 

215. The e.m.f. of rotationf that is, the e.m.f. generated in the 
rotor by its rotation through the magnetic field, which e.m.f., 
with the current in the respective circuit, produces the torque 
and so gives the power developed by the motor, is: 

Main circuit: 

Q\ = jSZ (coh ~ M. (25) 

Brush short-circuit: 

V< = jSZ' (/i - /,). (26) 

Substituting (18), (23), (24) into (25) and (26), and rearrang- 
ing, gives: 

Main Circuit E.m.f. of Rotation: 

£'. =^0fll+Xi-M- (27) 

Brush Short-circuit E.m.f. of Rotation: 

$\ = ™{Sco+ j\iA - c0X4} ; (28) 

or, neglecting smaller terms: 

£\ = -£*• (29) 

The Power produced by the main armature circuit is: 

Pi = [#'., /.is 

hence, substituting (22) and (27) : 


i%e |i + x, - M, J ±-gg4 4li] • 


p 

Let: 


(30) 


m = [ZK] (31) 

be the absolute value of the complex product, ZK, and: 

1 


A = cl + ja" 

X, = X', - j\'\ 
X4 = X'« + jX"4 


(32) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 389 

it is, substituting (31), (32) in (30), and expanding: 

Pi = ^jr U«U - Scoa") - rSc*a'] + (1 - Sc*r") (x(X\ - X'4) 

- r(X"i + X"4)] - Scoa'[r(\\ - X'„) + jr(X", + X"4)| 

- x (X'«iS* - X'iScoa" + X"4»Sc0a') -f r (k\ScW 
-X"4<S* + X"4Sc,a")}, (33) 

after canceling terms of secondary order. 
As first approximation follows herefrom: 

Pl = Sc^xU _ Scoa" - ?Sc*a>) 
m2 \ x / 

**{i-*.(^+^)} 


TO' 


S#X jl - Sc»(«" + ^a') 
= C0(l +Sl) 

hence a maximum for the speed S, given by: 

dS u' 


(34) 


or: 


So = ^l+ Co2 (a" + £ a') 7 - c« (a" + ^ «'). 


(35) 


and equal to: 


e*z 


Pi0 = 
1 2 


{^l+a«(^ + ^),-^(^/ + ^«#)|. (36) 


The complete expression of the power of the main circuit ia, 
from (33) : 

Pi - ***£-{ [l - &* (</' + V)]'-ft* - M - M*;, (37) 

where fc»T bXf k* are functions of X'i, X"i, X'4, X"*, as derived by 
rearranging (33). 
The Power produced in the bru*h short-circuit is: 

P4 - [#',, /M«; 


390 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

hence, substituting (24) and (28) : 

p pS*c0e X4ec0(l - S*)y 
4 IK' ZK J 

SWe* (1 - S«) r . . , .. „ "I 

5'coV (1 - 8*) . . , , . „ , 
= ±r (rX 4 + xX"4); 


TO2 


(38) 


hence positive, or assisting, below synchronism, retarding above 
synchronism. 

The total Power, or Output of the motor then is: 


P = Pi + P< 


or: 
Power Output: 


p = -- 


Scoe*x 


m2 


{ [l -&. («" + \ «') ] - 6o+S [c„ (x"4 + ^X'4) - 6t] 

- S'6, - S'co (x"4 + rx X'4) } ; (39) 


or, approximately: 


1 - 8* (a" + T- a') ] (40) 

,s^i- sco («"+;;«')} (41) 

co(i + s2) 

hence: 
Torque: 

given in synchronous watts. 

The power input into the motor, and the volt-ampere input, 
are, if: 

2 = I 2 — Jl 2, 

and : (42) 

*2 — V 2 T * 2 , J 

given by: 
Power Input: 

Po = ei\ (43) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 391 
Volt-ampere Input: 


Power-factor: 


Pa0 = «,, (44) 


V - j\ (45) 


Efficiency: 


Apparent Efficiency: 


V = p , (46) 

PV = p -, (47) 

etc. 

216. While excessive values of the short-circuit current under 
the commutator brushes, /4, give bad commutation, due to ex- 
cessive current densities under the brushes, the best commuta- 
tion corresponds not to the minimum value of I a — as the zero 
value at synchronism in the repulsion motor — but to that value 
of Ii for which the sudden change of current in the armature 
coil is a minimum, at the moment where the coil leaves the com- 
mutator brush. 

J 4 is the short-current in the armature coil during commuta- 
tion, reduced to the armature circuit, /i, by the ratio of effective 
turns: 

__ short-circuited turns under brushes ,.~. 

4 total effective armature turns 

The actual current in the short-circuited coils during commuta- 
tion then, is: 

// = y, (49) 

or, if we denote: 

£ = Ah (50) 

where A\ is a fairly large quantity, and substitute (24), it is: 

/'< = dWi_z_s') (51) 

Before an armature coil passes under the commutator brushes, 
it carries the current, — /i; while under the brushes, it carries 
the current, J'\\ and after leaving the brushes, it carries the cur- 
rent, +/i. 


302 ELECTRICAL APPARA TUS 

While passing under the commutator brushes, the current in 
the armature coils must change from, — f,, to f',, or bjr: 

v, - r. + u- 

In the moment of leaving the commutator brushes, the rur- 
rent in the armature coils must change from, f, to -+- fx, or hy: 

I» = h~ /'«- (53) 

The value, /'8, or the current change in the armature coils 
while entering commutation, is of less importance, since during 
this change the armature coils are short-circuited by the brushes. 

Of fundamental importance for the commutation is the value, 
/„, of Ihe current change in the armature coils while leaving the 
commutator brushes, since this change has to be brought about 
hy the 'resistance of the brush contact while the coil approaches 
the edge of the brush, and if considerable, can not be comptdtad 
thereby, but the current, /B, passes as arc beyond the edge of the 
brushes. 

Essential for good commutation, therefore, is thai the current, 
/„, should be zero or a minimum, and the study of the commu- 
tation of the single-phase commutator thus resolves itself largely 
into an investigation of the commutation current, /„, or its abso- 
lute value, if. 

The ratio of the commutation current, it, to the main 
current, >\, can be called the commutation constant: 


k - 


For good commutation, this ratio should l>e small or zero. 

The product of the commutation current, t„ and the speed, S, 
is proportional to the voltage induced by the break of ih<- mt- 
rent, or the voltage which maintains the arc at the edge of the 
commutator brushes, if sufficiently high, and may lie called the 
commutation vettage: 

C = Si,. (55) 

In the repulsion motor, it is, substituting (23) and [51 En 
and dropping the term with X«, as of secondary order: 

Commutation Current: 


jSc0 


A,c0(l - S») 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 393 


Commutation Constant: 


I 1 +j~° - ami - S1) 


0 

/'l 


1 + 


jSco 


= 1 - 


A 
A<co(l - S*) 

TTTScT 
"*" A 


(57) 


Or, denoting: 

AA = a\+ ja"t; 

substituting (32) and expanding: 

*' ZD 

I, e { 1 -c, [Sa" + (1 - S8) a'J -jc0 [(1 - S1) a", - Sa'} ) 
/i (r-5coa")+"iScoa' 

and, absolute: 


(58) 


(59) 


*' = m^ ( * ~ c° (Sa" + ( l ~ ,S2) a'4] I * + C»M ( 1 " 5*) «"4 - Sa'\ • 

(60) 


it 


= # 


- C0[Sa" + (1 - fi1) a'4])1 + C«« {(1 - .S*) a"4 - Sa'}4 

(1 - Scoa")1 + S'c0V2 

(61) 

Perfect commutation, or /„ = 0, would require from equation 

(58) : 

1 - c0[Sa" + (1-Ss)a'4] =0, 
(1 - S*) a"4- Sa' = 0; 
or: 

1 - CoSa" 


(62) 


« 4 = 


c0(l-S8)* 


,» _ Sa' _ i ' 

' - = = 1 — a 4. 


« 4 = 


1 - s* 


(63) 


This condition can usually not be fulfilled. 
The commutation is best for that speed, S, when the commu- 
tation current, ?'„, is a minimum, that is: 

di„ 


dS 


= 0; 


hence: 


~{(l-c*[Sa"+(l-S*)a'<))*+Co\(l-Si)a"<-Sa')i\=0 


(64) 


394 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

This gives a cubic equation in S, of which one root, 0 < Si < 1, 
represents a minimum. 

The relative commutation, that is, relative to the current con- 
sumed by the motor, is best for the value of speed, St, where the 
commutation factor, fc, is a minimum, that is: 

£-«• (65) 

217. The power output of the repulsion motor becomes aero 
at the approximate speed given by substituting P = 0 in the 
approximate equation (40), as: 

s.= ! 


eo(a"+r-a') (66) 

X 

and above this speed, the power, P, is negative, that is, the 
repulsion motor consumes power, acting as brake. 

This value, So, however, is considerably reduced by using the 
complete equations (39), that is, considering the effect of the 
short-circuit current under the brushes, etc. 

For S < 0, P < 0; that is, the power is negative, and the 
machine a generator, when driven backward, or, what amounts 
to the same electrically, when reversing either the field-circuit, 
/o, or the primary energy circuit, /j. In this case, the machine 
then is a repulsion generator. 

The equations of the repulsion generator are derived from those 
of the repulsion motor, given heretofore, by reversing the sign 
of S. 

The power, P4, of the short-circuit current under the brushes 
reverses at synchronism, and becomes negative above synchron- 
ism. The explanation is: This short-circuit current, /«, and a 
corresponding component of the main current, /i, are two cur- 
rents produced in quadrature in an armature or secondary, short- 
circuited in two directions at right angles with each other, and 
so offering a short-circuited secondary to the single-phase pri- 
mary, in any direction, that is, constituting a single-phase in- 
duction motor. The short-circuit current under the brushes so 
superimposes in the repulsion motor, upon the repulsion-motor 
torque, a single-phase induction-motor torque, which is positive 
Mow synchronism, zero at synchronism, and negative above 
synchronism, as induction-generator torque. It thereby lowers 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 


395 


the speed, S<>, at which the total torque vanishes, and reduces 
the power-factor and efficiency. 

218. As an example are shown in Fig. 188 the characteristic 
curves of a repulsion motor, with the speed, S, as abscissa?, for 
the constants: 


Impressed voltage: e = 500 volts. 
Exciting impedance, main field: Z = 0.25 + 3 j ohms, 
cross field: Z' = 0.25 + 2.5 j ohms. 


i i i 

e -5oo volts 

L25+3J Z,-aolS*0.075i 

as+i» z, -0.02s + ot07w 

z- 

»k. 

1 

mu 

\d 

-O.04 

bill 

X 

, 

■n 

;-£i 

■ ; 

" 

/A 

N 

> 

* 

v 

* 

1 

/ 

^* 

s 

, 

^ 

■; / 

N 

'■'/ 

- 

Self-inductive impedance, main field: Z0 = 0.1 + 0.3 j ohms, 
cross field: Z» = 0.025 + 0.075johms. 
armature: Zx = 0.025 4- 0.075 j ohms, 
brush short-circuit: Z* = 7.5 + 10 j ohms. 
Reduction factor, main field: c0 — 0.4. 
brush short-circuit: cA = 0.04, 


Hence: 


Z, = 0.08 + 0.60 j ohms. 
A =0.835 - 0.014 j. 

j - a'+ja"- 1.20 + 0.02 j. 

Xi = 0.031 - 0.007;. 
X, = 0.179 + 0.087 j. 
At = 4.475 + 2.175 j. 
A» = 0.202 - 0.010 j. 


396 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

Then, substituting in the preceding equations: 

K = (0.204 - 0.035 S) - j (0.031 + 0.328 S), 
ZK = (0.144 + 0.975 S) + j (0.604 - 0.187 S). 

Primary or Supply Current: 

. _ 500 { (1.031 - 0.179 S*) - j (0.007 + 0.087 S*) \ 
/2~ " ZK 

Secondary or Armature Current : 

T 500 {(1 + 0.048 5 -0.1 79 S*) +j 0.4 S - 0.087 S*)) 

II --------- 2K — : 

Brush Short-circuit Current: 


500 (1 - Ss) (0.072 - 0.035 j) 
U= . ZK ' 


and absolute: 


40 (1 - S*) 

lx = 

Ttt 


Commutation Factor: 


. = /(L508 Sl - 0.673)2 + (0.718 - 6.4 S - 0.704S*)* 
V (0.697 + 0.4 S- 0.014 )* 

Main E.m.f. of Rotation: 

500 5 (4.052 + 0.792 j) 
El = z_ 

Commutation E.m.f. of Rotation : 

„, 500 S* (0.4 - 4.8 j) 
E<= - ZK - • 

Power of Main Armature Circuit: 

P = 250 S (4 052 _ Q 122 s _ Q 65? S2) Jn kw 
m2 

Power of Brush Short-circuit: 

n 49.2 S2 (1 - S2) . . 
P4 = zlt~ — y in kw. 

Total Power Output: 


m2 


p = ?™ ? (4.052 + 0.075 S - 0.657 S2 - 0.197 S8). 
m2 

Torque : 

D = -°~ (4.052 + 0.075 S - 0.657 S2 - 0.197 S8), 
m2 

etc. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 397 

These curves are derived by calculating numerical values in 
tabular form, for S = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 
2.0, 2.2, 2.4. 

As seen from Fig. 188, the power-factor, p, rises rapidly, reach- 
ing fairly high values at comparatively low speeds, and remains 
near its maximum of 90 per cent, over a wide range of speed. 
The efficiency, 17, follows a similar curve, with 90 per cent, maxi- 
mum near synchronism. The power, P, reaches a maximum of 
192 kw. at 60 per cent, of synchronism — 450 revolutions with a 
four-pole 25-cycle motor — is 143 kw. at synchronism, and van- 
ishes, together with the torque, D, at double synchronism. The 
torque at synchronism corresponds to 143 kw., the starting 
torque to 657 synchronous kw. 

The commutation factor, fc, starts with 1.18 at standstill, the 
same value which the same motor would have as series motor, 
but rapidly decreases, and reaches a minimum of 0.23 at 70 per 
cent, of synchronism, and then rises again to 1.00 at synchron- 
ism, and very high values above synchronism. That is, the 
commutation of the repulsion is fair already at very low speeds, 
becomes very good somewhat below synchronism, but poor at 
speeds considerably above synchronism : this agrees with the ex- 
perience on such motors. 

In the study of the commutation, the short-circuit current 
under the commutator brushes has been assumed as secondary 
alternating current. This is completely the case only at stand- 
still, but at speed, due to the limited duration of the short-circuit 
current in each armature coil — the time of passage of the coil 
under the brush — an exponential term superimposes upon the 
alternating, and so modifies the short-circuit current and thereby 
the commutation factor, the more, the higher the speed, and 
greater thereby the exponential term is. The determination of 
this exponential term is beyond the scope of the present work, 
but requires the methods of evaluation of transient or momentary 
electric phenomena, as discussed in "Theory and Calculation of 
Transient Electric Phenomena and Oscillations." 

B. Series Repulsion Motor 

219. As fuither illustration of the application of these funda- 
mental equations of the single-phase commutator motor, (1) to 
(6), a motor may be investigated, in which the four independent 
constants are chosen as follows: 


398 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

1. Armature and field connected in series with each other. 
That is: 

#1 + Co#o = # = «ii (67) 

where: 

Co = reduction factor of field winding to armature; that is, 

. „ field turns 

ratio of effective r — — : 

armature turns 

It follows herefrom: 

/o = coli. (68) 

2. The e.m.f. impressed upon the compensating winding is 
given, and is in phase with the e.m.f., ei, which is impressed upon 
field plus armature: 

#2 = e2. (69) 

That is, #2 is supplied by the same transformer or compensator 
as 6i, in series or in shunt therewith. 

3. No rotor-exciting circuit is used: 

h = 0, (70) 

and therefore: 

0 

4. No rotor-exciting brushes, or brushes in quadrature posi- 
tion with the main-armature brushes, are used, and so: 

U - 0, (71) 

that is, the armature carries only one set of brushes, which give 
the short-circuit current, J\. 

Since the compensating circuit, e2, is an independent circuit, 
it can be assumed as of the same number of effective turns as 
the armature, that is, e2 is the e.m.f. impressed upon the com- 
pensating circuit, reduced to the armature circuit. (The actual 
e.m.f. impressed upon the compensating circuit thus would be: 

«. , • compensating turns \ 
c2Cs, where c, = ratio effective — mature turn8 ) 

220. Substituting (68) into (1), (2), (3), and (5), and (1) and 
(2) into (67), gives the three motor equations: 


(72) 


e, = Zih + Z' (/, - /,) - jSZ (co/, - /«) 

+ c0*Zo /i + CoZ (c0/o — h), 
ei = ZtJt + Z' (Jt - /,), (73) 

0 = Z4i + Z(I<- Co/,) - jSZ' (/, - /,). (74) 


SIXGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 399 


Substituting now: 

1 
Y* = ~ = quadrature, or transformer exciting | 


it — Xa — X • — jX 3 


z + z< 

Z' 


= X4 = X'i+jV'4 


and 


~ = A = a' — jV = impedance ratio of the 
two quadrature (tuxes, 

Zi + c<r <Z» — Zi = Z* 


« = «l + «2, 


(75) 


(7fy 


Adding (72? and ' 73r and rearrangim^, ajv#* : 
< = ZJ« + [l (Zi - jikj - IJL 


_ ,«• 


or: 


^ = ***/* + U 'A* - ;.v% - /. '- - # .! 
From (73/ follows: 


or: 
and 


/; = /; 1 - X: - tt)\ 


(. = f 1 - x. - *>' 


From '74 foBow« 


0 = /< Z ~ Z. - / tJ? ~ ,,>/', - ^Z'/, 


> > 


'»/ 


/ 7* 


i'4, 


in its eratafcT^oi:. That !•?>, wh*n *>uU*ututiiAg '7^ jij '70,, // 
can be drr>pj^o : 


or: 


^UUfoxiu^wly 


'Vh 


400 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Hence, (80) substituted in (79) gives: 

0 = U (Z + Z*) ~ CoZh + jSet, 


or: 


/■ 


jSet 


Hence : 


and actual value of short-circuit current: 


r. -».{/.-£). 


where: 


Co 


b = "°, a fairly large quantity, and 


C\ = reduction factor of brush short-circuit 
to armature circuit. 

The commutation current then is: 

/. - /l - /'4 


»/l(l -6X4) + 


jSetb\< 
cQZ 


Substituting (81) and (80) into (77), gives: 


/i = 


or, denoting: 


e 1 ^JSt\i (c0 - j-S)_— jf_X»_ 

Z A8 - j«Sco ~ XiCo (c0 - jS) + \2A 


it is: 


K = A* - jSco - X4c0 (c0 - j/S) + X2A, 


. _ ejl -jSt\i(co -jS) -t\i\ 
(1 - Zk 

It is, approximately : 


A3 = 


Z: 


— /._2 


hence : 


z = 
x, = 0, 


7C = c0(l — C0X4) (c0 -j<S), 
= efl — JSOn (c - jS) 1 
'' c„Z(l -c„X4)(co - j»S)" 


c0Z(l — CoX<) i Co — /<S 


' 1 ) 


(81) 


(82) 


(83) 


(84) 


(85) 


(86) 


(87) 


(88) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 401 


Substituting now (85) respectively (87), (88) into (78), (81) (84), 
and into: 

r,=i,SZ(co/i-/4),1 

#\ - jSZ' (/, - /,), 
gives the 

Equation* of the Series Repulsion Motor: 


K = Az - jSc0 - \iC0 (c0 — -jS) + \sA, 
approximately: 

K = Co (1 - c0X4) (Co - jS). 

Inducing, or Compensator Current: 

_ e { 1 - i»Mc0 - jS) - (1 +_0_X2| , eta - X2) 
/2 Z# " """ " Z' 

approximately: 


/•- 


j»X4« 


+ 


te 


c0Z (1 - C0X4) (co - jS) c0Z (1 - C0X4) Z' 


Armatore, or Secondary Current: 

. e\l -jSikifa -jS) -<\») 
tl~ — ZK~ ' 

approximately: 

j __ _ e f 1_ .« I 

' l " 60Z (f- C0X4) 1 Co - jS ^4 / ' 


Brush Short-circuit Current: 


T cX4 

#4 — wr\ : 


f 1 


Z(l - C0X4) lco -jS 
approximately: 

cX4 j 1 


- jSt(l +X4- c0X4)!» 


/4 = 


Z(l -c-oX4) I c0 - jS 


jstl 


Commutation Current: 


(89) 


(90) 


(91) 


(92) 


(93) 


/. -- 


1 - \tb 


c0Z (1 — c0X<) I Co — jS 


!: — ,^+is<x4[(6- 1) 

+ 6X4(1 - Co)]}' 


approximately: 


h = 


e (1 ■ 

c0Z(l — CoX<)lco 


^ + jSt\ibj 


26 


(94) 


402 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Main E.m.f. of Rotation: 


approximately: 


jSe 


f 1 -X4 


Co\i 


Co 


^ + jS<X«*(l -co)} 


Wl = JSe (1 


XO 


(95) 


(96) 


(98) 


(1 - coX*) (c0 - jS) 
Quadrature E.m.f. of Rotation: 

E\ = + jSte. 

Power Output: 

P - P, + P4 

- [#'1, /J1 + [^'4, /dl. 
Power Input: 

Po = [«i, /1]1 + [62, /2]1. 
Volt-ampere Input: 

P = ea'i + e*i2 

= e{(l - 0*i + ^'2}, 

where the small letters, i\ and it, denote the absolute values of 
the currents, /1 and /2. 

When t'i and i2 are derived from the same compensator or 
transformer (or are in shunt with each other, as branches of the 
same circuit, if e\ = 62), as usually the case, in the primary cir- 
cuit the current corresponds not to the sum, {(1 — 0 ix + tit] of 
the secondary currents, but to their resultant, [(1 — 0 /1 + f/2]1, 
and if the currents, J\ and /2, are out of phase with each other, 
as is more or less the case, the absolute value of their resultant 
is less than the sum of the absolute values of the components. 
The volt-ampere input, reduced to the primary source of power, 
then is: 

Pao = e[(l - 0 /1 + th\\ (99) 

and: 

*■ <iq ^s. 1 a» 

P 

From these equations then follows the torque: D = ■», the 

o 

power-factor, p = p , etc. 

These equations (90) to (99) contain two terms, one with, and 
one without t = - , and so, for the purpose of investigating the 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 403 

effect of the distribution of voltage, e, between the circuits, e\ 
and 62, they can be arranged in the form: F = K\ + tK*. 

For: 

t = 0, 

that is, all the voltage impressed upon the armature circuit, and 
the compensating circuit short-circuited, these equations are 
those of the inductively compensated series motor. 

For: 

that is, all the voltage impressed upon the compensating or in- 
ducing circuit, and the armature circuit closed in short-circuit, 
that is, the armature energizing the field, the equations are those 
of the repulsion motor with secondary excitation. 

For: 

a reverse voltage is impressed upon the armature circuit. 

Study of Commutation 

221. The commutation of the alternating-current commutator 
motor mainly depends upon : 

(a) The short-circuit current under the commutator brush, 

which has the actual value: J\ = — * High short-circuit current 

C4 

causes arcing under the brushes, and glowing, by high current 
density: 

(6) The commutation current, that is, the current change in 
the armature coil in the moment of leaving the brush short-cir- 
cuit, J* = /1 — l\. This current, and the e.m.f. produced by 
it, SIot produce sparking at the edge of the commutator brushes, 
and is destructive, if considerable. 

(a) Short-circuit Current under Brushes 

Using the approximate equation (93), the actual value of the 
short-circuit current under the brushes is: 


*'« - Jo"- coxo I trhs - ** } ■' (100> 


e\J) 
where: 


Co 1 

b = — , or t = reduction factor of short-circuit under brushes, 

C4 0 ' 


104 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 

to field circuit, that is: 

, _ number of field turns 

number of effective short-circuit turns' 
hence a large quantity. 

The absolute value of the short-circuit current, therefore, h: 


call - cXJ (c* + 8*) 


hence a minimum for that value of I, where: 
/ = coJ + SMI - ( (c,,1 + S2))* = mi 
= 1 - ( (c1 + Ss) = 0, hence, 

t -- 


1 

" a,' + S>' 


8 " >f" * 

That is, t = — = j,- v" — j gives minimum short-circuit cur- 
rent at speed, S, and inversely, speed 5 = »/- — e#*, gives 

minimum short-circuit current at voltage ratio, (. 

For ( =■ 1, or the repulsion motor with secondary excitation, 
the short-circuit current is minimum at speed, S = y/\ — ca'. or 
somewhat below synchronism, and is j'» = - , while in ihe re- 
pulsion motor with primary excitation, the short-circuit current 
is a minimum, and equals zero, at synchronism S = 1. 

The lower the voltage ratio, t = !, the higher is the speed, S, 
at which the short-circuit current reaches a minimum. 

The short-circuit current, f\, however, is of far less importance 
than the commutation current, /,. 

(6) Commutation Current 

222. While the value, J'„ = [\ + ft, or the current change in 
the armature coils while entering commutation, is of niiuor im- 
portance, of foremost importance for good commutation is that 
the current change in the armature coils, when leaving the short- 
circuit under the brushes: 

h = h- /'. (103) 

is zero or a minimum. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 405 


Using the approximate equation of the commutation current 
(94), it is: 


/. - 


c0Z(l — c0X4) I Co — jS 
e 


[ l " X?* + jStkJb 


c0Z(l - c0X4)(co -jS) 

and, denoting: 

X4 = X\ + j\"<, 
it is, expanded : 

e 


;0-r { 1 - X46 + jS (co - jS) t\Ab] ; (104) 


U-ZTi 


-m HI - X'lfr + Stb(S\\ - C0X"4)] 


CoZ(l-c0X4)(co+iS) 

- j [\"<b - S» (c0X'4 + SX"4)] ) ; (105) 
hence, absolute: 


h = 


C<>z[l - C0X4]-y/Co2 + fi[2 


\[1 - X'4fc + Sft(flX#4 - c0X"4)]2 + [X"4fc - Stb(c0\\ + SX"4)]2, 

(106) 
where [1 — c0X4] denotes the absolute value of (1 — c0X4). 

The commutation current is zero, if either S = 00 } that is, 
infinite speed, which is obvious but of no practical interest, or 
the parenthesis in (105) vanishes. 

Since this parenthesis is complex, it vanishes when both of 
its terms vanish. This gives the two equations: 

1 - X'4fc + Stb (SX'4 - c0X"4) = 0, 
X"46 - Stb (c0X'4 + SX"4) = 0. 


(107) 


From these two equations are calculated the two values, the 
speed, S, and the voltage ratio, t, as: 


hence: 


on — 


h = 


Soto = 


C» (6X4* - X'4) 


x" 


4 
x'V 


c0W(6X4* - X'4) ' 
X"4 


606X4* 


(108) 


For instance, if: 


Z =0.25 + 3j, 
Z< = 5 + 2.5 j: 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


4 

Z-VZi 

u' ' 

Co 

= 0.4, 

C4 

- 0.04; 

hence: 

b 

- 10; 

and herefrom 

S, 
k 

- 2.02, 

- 0.197 

- 0.248 j = X', + j\"„ 


that is, at about double synchronism, for es = te = 0.197 e, or 
about 20 per cent, of e, the commutation current vanishes. 

In general, there is thus in the series repulsion motor only one 
speed, Su, at which, if the voltage ratio has the proper value, (o, 
the commutation current, i„, vanishes, and the commutation i.- 
perfect. At any other speed some commutation current is left, 
regardless of the value of the voltage ratio, (. 

With the two voltages, e\ and et, in phase with each other, t lie 
commutation current can not be made to vanish at any desired 
speed, S. 

223. It remains to be seen, therefore, whether by a phase dis- 
placement between et and e», that is, if ei is chosen out of phase 
with the total voltage, e, the commutation current can be made 
to vanish at any speed, S, by properly choosing the value of the 
voltage ratio, and the phase difference. 

Assuming, then, ej out of phase with the total voltage, e, hence 
denoting it. by: 

#s = et (cos 0s - j sin (?,), (109) 

the voltage ratio, (, now also is a complex quantity, and expressed 
by: 

T = ^ = t (cob 0i - j sin $i) = t' - jt". (110) 

Substituting (110) in (105), and rearranging, gives: 

'• " cza-cx.Xc-.M I[1 - v'fc + m w' - **"•> 

+ Xt"b ta,X'( + SX",)| - j|K",6 - St'b (c„X', + SX",i 
+ S!"c.(SX'. - e„X",)]]; (HI) 

and this expression vanishes, if: 

1 - X',6 + Sfb (SX\ - c,X",) + .Sf'o ta,X', + .SX",) - 0, I 
X'Vi - Sl'b (e.X', + SX",) + Sf'b (SX', - oX",) - 0:| 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 407 


and herefrom follows: 
, = SbA2 - S\\ + c0X"4 


S6X42(S2 + Co2) Co2 + S2 


1 - 


S\ 4 — CqX 4 


„ = Co6X42 - CqX/4-iSX//4 _ 1 

S6X420S2+co2) 
or approximately: 

V = 
t" = 


SfcX42 
Co Cq\\ + SX"4 ] 
Co2 + S2 \ S Sb\A2 


} 


(112) 


Co2 + S2' 

Co 


(113) 


S (co2 + S2) 

t" = 0 substituted in equation (112) gives S = So, the value 
recorded in equation (108). 

It follows herefrom, that with increasing speed, S, tf and still 
more t", decrease rapidly. For S = 0, V and t" become infinite. 
That is, at standstill, it is not possible by this method to produce 
zero commutation current. 

The phase angle, 02, of the voltage ratio, T = t' — jt", is given 

by: 

, „ _ ^ _ C06X42 - Cp\'A - SX"4. 
tan 02 - t, - Sfex^2 _ sx,^ + CqVV 

rearranged, this gives: 

Co sin 02 + S cos 02 &X42 — W . 


(114) 


and, denoting: 


Co sin 62 — S sin 02 


S f 

— = tan a, 

Co ' 


X" 


(115) 


(116) 


where a may be called the "speed angle," it is, substituted in 
(115): 

6X42 - X\ 


tan (02 + <r) = 


hence : 


and: 


X"4 
= constant; 


02 + o- = 7, 
02 — y __ ffm 
— r-77 is a large quantity, hence 7 near 90°. 

A 4 


(117) 


(118) 
(119) 


<r is also near 90° for all speeds, S, except very slow speeds, since 
in (116) Co is a small quantity. 


408 


ELECTRICAL APPARA TUS 


Hence S-i is near zcru for all except very low speeds. 

For very low spe.edu, a is small, and $2 thus large and positive. 

That is, the voltage, £2, impressed upon the compensating 
circuit to get negligible commutation current, must l>e approxi- 
mately in phase with e for all except low speeds. At low speeds, 
it must lag, the more, the lower the speed. Its absolute value 
is very large at low speeds, but decreases rapidly with increasing 
speed, to very low values. 

For instance, let, as before: 

X, - 0.304 - 0.248 j, 
c„ = 0.4, 


fl, = 0 for <t = 79°; hence, by (116), S„ = 2.02, or double syn- 
chronism. Above this speed, 02 is leading, but very small, since 
the maximum leading value, for infinite speed, S = <* . is given 
by d = 90°, as, 0: = - 11°. Below the speed, So, 0i is positive, 
or lagging; 

for S = 1, it isff = 68°, 0S = +11°, hence still approximately 
in phase; 

for S = 0.4, it is o- = 45", 0S = 34°; hence Et is still nearer in 
phase than in quadrature to e. 

The corresponding values of T = t' + t"- are, from (112): 

S - 2.02, e5 = 0, T = 0.197, t = 0.197, 

B - \, 81 = -+-11°, T = 0.747 +0.140 j, I = 0.760, 
S = 0.4, 02 = 34°, T = 3.00 -2.00 j, ( = 3.61. 

224. The introduction of a phase displacement between tW 
compensating voltage, E 5, and the total voltage, e, in general is 
more complicated, and since for all but the lowest epeedfl tbt 
required phase displacement, 0;, is small, it is usually sufficient 
to employ a compensating voltage, e., in phase with e. 

In this case, no value of / exists, which makes the commutation 
current vanish entirely, except, at the speed, So. 

The problem then is, to determine for any speed, S, that value 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 409 

of the voltage ratio, t, which makes the commutation current, i99 
a minimum. This value is given by: 

~dt = °» (120) 

where i0 is given by equation (106). 

Since equation (106) contains t only under the square root, 
the minimum value of iu is given also by: 

where : 

K = [1 - b\'A + Sib {S\'4 - c0X"4)]2 + [fcX"4 - Sib (c0\'i + S\"<)]\ 

Carrying out this differentiation, and expanding, gives: 

/ = S6\42 ~ S\'< + Co*"* = 1 L _ SX< - c0X'^l mn 
1 Sb\J (co2 + S2) Jco2 + S2 1 " S6X42 " f u ; 

This is the same value as the real component, tf, of the complex 
voltage ratio, Th which caused the commutation current to 
vanish entirely, and was given by equation (112). 

It is, approximately: 

' - cTW (122) 

Substituting (121) into (105) gives the value of the minimum 
commutation current, i0%. 

Since the expression is somewhat complicated, it is preferable 
to introduce trigonometric functions, that is, substitute: 

tan 6 - *"4> (123) 

A 4 

where 6 is the phase angle of X4, and therefore: 

J/ = J4 " !' I (124) 

X 4 =* X4 cos 6, I 


and also to introduce, as before, the speed angle (116): 

S 
tan a = ■> 

Co 


(125) 


v - \/c«2»; , 

hence: 

,S - 7*111*, I (126) 

Ct, «■ 7 com 0, J 


410 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Substituting these trigonometric values into the expression 
(121) of the voltage ratio for minimum commutation current, 
it is: 


1_ __ sin (a — 6) 


r Sbqx< <127) 

Substituting (117) into (106) and expanding gives a relatively 
simple value, since most terms eliminate: 

Jg = e {[cos2 (a — 6) + b\ (sin a sin (a — 6) — cos 6)] 

+ j [ sin (a — 5) cos (a — 6) — 6X4 (sin a cos (cr — 6) — sin 6)]} 


**o = 


(128) 


(129) 


(130) 


CoZ(l - C0X4, (c0 +JS) 

and the absolute value: 

e ( cos (<r — 6) — 6X4 cos <r) . 

coz [ 1 - C0X4] Vc? + S* ' 
or, resubstituting for a and 5: 

. eJSVV^Co (X42fe - X/) } 

lf ° coz [1 - CoX"4] (co2 + S2) ' 
From (129) and (130) follows, that ig = 0, or the commutation 

current vanishes, if: 

cos (a — 6) — 6X4 cos a = 0, (131) 

or: 

SX"4 - co (X42fe - X'4) = 0. 
This gives, substituting, X"4 = y/\f — XV, and expanding: 

X4 


X,t = 


Co2 + S2 

cos (a — 6) = 
From (131) follows: 


{6X4C02 ± SVS2 -"co2"(fe2X42 - 1)), 

&X4C0 


Vco2 + S2 


(132) 


cos (<r — 6) = 6X4 cos <r. 

Since cos (c — 6) must be less than one, this means: 

6X4 cos<r < 1, 


or 


X4< 


b cos 


or: 


or, inversely: 


x ^VcV+S*' 
A4 < y 

Cob 
S > Co V62X42 - 1. 


(133) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 411 

That is: 

The commutation current, i0i can be made to vanish at any 
speed, S, at given impedance factor, X4, by choosing the phase 
angle of the impedance of the short-circuited coil, 5, or the resist- 
ance component, X', provided that X4 is sufficiently small, or the 
speed, S, sufficiently high, to conform with equations (133). 

From (132) follows as the minimum value of speed, S, at which 
the commutation current can be made to vanish, at given X4: 

Si = Co Vfe2x42 - 1, 

and: 


v -1- 


hence: 


X". = ^ - I • 


For high values of speed, S, it is, approximately: 

cos (<r — 5) = 0, 
a - 6 = 90°, 

tan a = — ; 

Co 

hence: <r = 90° 

6 = 0 ' 

X 4 = X4. 

That is, the short-circuited coil under the brush contains no 
inductive reactance, hence: 

At low and medium speeds, some inductive reactance in the 
short-circuited coils is advantageous, but for high speeds it is 
objectionable for good commutation. 

225. As an example are shown, in Figs. 189 and 192, the char- 
acteristic curves of series-repulsion motors, for the constants: 

Impressed voltage: e = 500 volts, 

Exciting impedance, main field: Z = 0.25 + 3j ohms, 

Exciting impedance, cross field: Z' = 0.25 +2.5 j ohms, 
Self-inductive impedance, main 

field : Z0 = 0. 1 + 0.3 j ohms, 
Self-inductive impedance, cross 

field : Z% = 0.025 + 0.075 j ohms, 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


fc 

1 

■i 

< 

=r 

3 

1 

s 

■y 

_ 

- 

-- 

■ 

e-500 VOLTS -f»-o 

z- o.;5* si Zi- 002s + o.07sj 

j!=0.IS+2.Sj ZJ-0.O2S+ 0,075) 

/ 

P 

» 

a 

-0.4 C •- 0.04 


< 

=- 

- 

1 

- 

1JL 

/ 

1" 

i 

« 

0L1 

:■■ 

m 

> 

Z= 0.25+3 j Zi=0.025+0.075j 

Z' 0.;S+2_5J Z,-0.O:5 4-0.O75j 
ZrO.1 + 0.3J Z,= 7.S + 1D) 

n 

n 

l\" I - 

--» 


*H: 

", 

1 

J*£ 

n 

^ 

! 

H ; 

n 

K 

/ 

... a 

« 

h 

f 

M 

n 

# 

- 

IN 

u 

i. 

MM 

/ 

< 

C- BOO VOLTS -f = 0.5 

/ 

I 

0.25»3j Z, -0 025+0075. 

> 

D 

^ 

'1 

.. 

_ 

/ 

-- 

»E 

/ 

n. 

•• 

* 

. 

/ 

j 

f 

P 

i 

•" 

\ 

;t-- 

a 

H 

' 

/ 

-~~ 

/ 

SPEED 

Fig. 191. — Scries repulsion motor. 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 413 

Self-inductive impedance arma- 
ture: Zi= 0.025 + 0.075 j ohms, 
Self-inductive impedance, brush 

short-circuit: ZA= 7.5 + lOjohms, 

Reduction factor, main field: c„ = 0.4, 

brush short-circuit c* = 0.04; 
that is, the same constants as used in the repulsion motor, 
Fig. 188. 

Curves are plotted for the voltage ratios; 
t = 0: inductively compensated series motor, Fig. 189. 
t = 0.2: series repulsion motor, high-speed, Fig. 190. 
( = 0.5: series repulsion motor, medium-speed, Fig. 191. 
( = 1.0: repulsion motor with secondary excitation, low-speed, 
Fig. 192. 


e 

soo 

■ 

Z'"0.!i*2.Sj Z,-0-025t0.07Sj 

I 

3 

sv 

C. - O.J C, 0.04 

iir 

]v 

... 

— 

"n 

- 

"", 

;> 

*' 

.._ 

— 

r 

— . 

. 

— 

IT 

, 

' 

" 

IsV 

■+. 

s 

IUL 

7~, 

* 

V 

« 

•±>i 

/ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

Mill 

■ 

/ 

-v 

SPEED 

Fig. 192— Rcpulsio 

secondary excitation. 

is, from above constants 

Z3 -Zi + c»(Z»+Z) 

- 0.08 + 0.60 j. 

i.-5 

- 0.202 - 0.010}. 

*-5 

- 0.835 - 0.014 j. 

--* 

- 0.031 - 0.007 j. 

x, - -z- 
' Q + Z, 

- 0.179 + 0.087 j. 

b-* 

- 10. 

~ 


414 ELECTKICAL APPARATUS 

Hence, substituting into the preceding equations: 

(90) ZK = Z, - jSeoZ - X,CoZ (e, - jS) + X3Z' 

= (0,160 + 0.975 S) +j {0.590 - 0.187 S), 

(92) /, = £, - ^ US^ic-jS) + U\ 

= IR + ^iC-°-031 + 0035's-|>i:'' s 

- j" ( - 0.007 + 0.072 S + 0.087 #') | , 

(91) /, = /, (0.969 + 0.007 j) + et (0.010 - 0.096 j), 
(93) 

a (0.072 +0.035;)+ 3d [ (0.016 - 0.072 6')-j0.045+0.035g) | 


h = 


ZK 


226. Ah seen, these four curves are very similar to each other 
and to those of the repulsion motor, with the exception of the 
commutation current, i,, and commutation factor, k = -?- 

The commutation factor of the compensated series motor, 
that is, the ratio of current change in the armature coil while 
leaving the brushes, to total armature current, is constant in the 
series motor, at all speeds. In the series repulsion motors, the 
commutation factor, h, starts with the same value at standstill, 
as the series motor, but decreases with increasing speed, thus 
giving a superior commutation to that of the series motor, reaches 
a minimum, and then increases again. Beyond the minimum 
commutation factor, the efficiency, power-factor, torque and out- 
put of the motor first slowly, then rapidly decrease, due to the 
rapid increase of the commutation losses. These higher values, 
however, are of little practical value, since the commutation is 
bad. 

The higher the voltage ratio, (, that is, the more voltage is 
impressed upon the compensating circuit, and the less upon the 
armature circuit, the lower is the speed at which the commuta- 
tion factor is a minimum, and the commutation so good or perfect. 
That is, with ( = 1 , or the repulsion motor with secondary ex- 
citation, the commutation is best at 70 per cent, of synchronism, 
and gets poor above synchronism. With t = 0.5, or a series 
repulsion motor with half the voltage on the compensating, half 
on the armature circuit, the commutation is best just above syn- 
chronism, with the motor constants chosen in this instance, and 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 415 

gets poor at speeds above 150 per cent, of synchronism. With 
t = 0.2, or only 20 per cent, of the voltage on the compensating 
circuit, the commutation gets perfect at double synchronism. 

Best commutation thus is secured by shifting the supply vol- 
tage with increasing speed from the compensating to the arma- 
ture circuit. 

t > 1, or a reverse voltage, — ei, impressed upon the armature 
circuit, so still further improves the commutation at very low 
speeds. 

For high values of t, however, the power-factor of the motor 
falls off somewhat. 

The impedance of the short-circuited armature coils, chosen 
in the preceding example: 

ZK = 7.5 + 10 j, 

corresponds to fairly high resistance and inductive reactance in 
the commutator leads, as frequently used in such motors. 

227. As a further example are shown in Fig. 193 and Fig. 194 
curves of a motor with low-resistance and low-reactance com- 
mutator leads, and high number of armature turns, that is, low 
reduction factor of field to armature circuit, of the constants: 

Z4 = 4 + 2j; 
hence : 

X4 = 0.373 + 0.267 j, 
and: 

Co = 0.3, 

d = 0.03, 

the other constants being the same as before. 

Fig. 193 shows, with the speed as abscissae, the current, torque, 
power output, power-factor, efficiency and commutation current, 
i0f under such a condition of operation, that at low speeds t = 1.0, 
that is, the motor is a repulsion motor with secondary excita- 
tion, and above the speed at which t = 1.0 gives best commuta- 
tion (90 per cent, of synchronism in this example), t is gradually 
decreased, so as to maintain ig a minimum, that is, to maintain 
best commutation. 

As seen, at 10 per cent, above synchronism, ig drops below t, 
that is, the commutation of the motor becomes superior to that 
of a good direct-current motor. 

Fig. 194 then shows the commutation factors, fc = -?> of the 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


\ 

i i 1 1 i i i i i i 1 1 

-» 

e SQO VOLTS 
Z =0.25 +3 j OHM Z,-0.O26 + 0.079 J0"»t 

\ ,- 

m 

so 

m 

c. 0.3 

n 

i 

\p 

mt 

/ 

-r 

. i 

goo 

EM 

, 

>•> 

■v 

MS 

H 

V 

\ 

p 

-= 

,' 

V 

.. 

-=^= 

.-v 

f 

J"* 

VI 

1 1 

' 

/ 

H 

LK. 

^ 

i 

' 

5svhv 

\7 

/ 

/ 

Z-0J5 

Lfl 

< 

/ 

/ 

3.00 

'" 

SA 

7 

z. 

oo;5io.075yo-»i 

4-IjOHM 

V\ 

II! 

b, 

/ 

£:?:" 

s-' 

a. 00 

- 

\ V 

* 

1.7B 

\ 

\ 

■ 

.v 

!\ 

\ 

/ 

'^f 

V 

/ 

\ 

sj /" 

v 

s. 

<o 

/ 

1 

-.' 

a 

>- 

... 

\ 

'- 

— ■ 

\ 

/ 

.... 

4- 

" 

-- 

~A 

^ 

O.ffl 0.1O 0.60 0.80 l.Of 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 417 

different motors, all under the assumption of the same constants: 

Z = 0.25 + Sj, 
Z' = 0.25 +2.5j, 
Z0 = 0. 1 4- 0.3 j, 
Z2 = 0.025 + 0.075 j, 
Zi = 0.025 + 0.075 j, 
Z4 = 4 + 2 j, 

Co = 0.3, 

c4 = 0.03. 

Curve I gives the commutation factor of the motor as induct- 
ively compensated series motor (t = 0), as constant, k = 3.82, 
that is, the current change at leaving the brushes is 3.82 times 
the main current. Such condition, under continued operation, 
would give destructive sparking. 

Curve II shows the series repulsion motor, with 20 per cent, of 
the voltage on the compensating winding, t = 0.2; and 

Curve III with half the voltage on the compensating winding, 
t = 0.5. 

Curve IV corresponds to t = 1, or all the voltage on the com- 
pensating winding, and the armature circuit closed upon itself: 
repulsion motor with secondary excitation. 

Curve V corresponds to t = 2, or full voltage in reverse direction 
impressed upon the armature, double voltage on the compen- 
sating winding. 

Curve VI gives the minimum commutation factor, as derived 
by varying t with the speed, in the manner discussed before. 

For further comparison are given, for the same motor 
constants: 

Curve VII, the plain repulsion motor, showing its good com- 
mutation below synchronism, and poor commutation above 
synchronism; and 

Curve VIII, an overcompensated series motor, that is, con- 
ductively compensated series motor, in which the compensating 
winding contains 20 per cent, more ampere-turns than the arma- 
ture, so giving 20 per cent, overcompensation. 

As seen, overcompensation does not appreciably improve 
commutation at low speeds, and spoils it at higher speeds. 

Fig. 194 also gives the two components of the compensating 
e.m.f., E2, which are required to give perfect commutation, or 
zero commutation current: 

27 


410 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


Substituting these trigonometric values into the expression 
(121) of the voltage ratio for minimum commutation current, 
it is: 


# _ _1 __ sin (a — b) 

1 ~ .2 


01 x (127) 

q* Sbq\t v 

Substituting (117) into (106) and expanding gives a relatively 
simple value, since most terms eliminate: 

Jg = e {[cos2 (a — 6) + b\ (sin a sin (a — 6) — cos 6)] 

+ j [ sin (a — 6) cos (a — 5) — 6X4 (sin <r cos (a — 6) — sin 6)]} 


(128) 


(129) 


(130) 


CoZ (1 - C0X4, (c0 + jS) 

and the absolute value: 

e ( cos (q- — 6) — 6X4 cos <r) . 

l'° = Coz[l - CoXjv^ +"£*"' 
or, resubstituting for <r and 5: 

. e{5X//4-c0(X42fe-X4/)} 

*'° Coz [1 - CoXJ (co2 + S2) " 

From (129) and (130) follows, that igQ = 0, or the commutation 

current vanishes, if: 

cos (<r — 6) — 6X4 cos a = 0, (131) 

or: 

SX"4 - Co (X42fc - X\) = 0. 
This gives, substituting, X"4 = VX42 — XV, and expanding: 

X, 


X\ - ^rj-gi 1&W ± S VS2 - Co2 (62XV - 1)}, 

6X4C0 
cos (, - I) - ^qrii' 

From (131) follows: 

cos (a — 6) = 6X4 cos cr. 

Since cos (c — 8) must be less than one, this means: 

6X4 cos<r < 1, 


(132) 


orK 


X4< 


b cos 


or: 


or, inversely: 


x ^Vc02 + s2' 

A4 < 1 > 

c0b 

S > c0 V&2X42 - 1. 


(133) 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 411 

That is: 

The commutation current, i0} can be made to vanish at any 
speed, Sy at given impedance factor, \4, by choosing the phase 
angle of the impedance of the short-circuited coil, 5, or the resist- 
ance component, X', provided that X4 is sufficiently small, or the 
speed, Sf sufficiently high, to conform with equations (133). 

From (132) follows as the minimum value of speed, S, at which 
the commutation current can be made to vanish, at given X4: 

Si = Co V62X4* - 1, 
and: 


x« ~b' 


hence: 


x"< - Vx*' - I- 


For high values of speed, S, it is, approximately: 

cos (<r — 8) = 0, 
<r - 6 = 90°, 

tan <r = - ; 
Co 

hence: a- = 90° 

X 4 = X4. 

That is, the short-circuited coil under the brush contains no 
inductive reactance, hence: 

At low and medium speeds, some inductive reactance in the 
short-circuited coils is advantageous, but for high speeds it is 
objectionable for good commutation. 

225. As an example are shown, in Figs. 189 and 192, the char- 
acteristic curves of series-repulsion motors, for the constants: 

Impressed voltage: e = 500 volts, 

Exciting impedance, main field : Z = 0.25 + 3j ohms, 

Exciting impedance, cross field: Z'= 0.25 +2.5 j ohms, 
Self-inductive impedance, main 

field : Z0 = 0. 1 + 0.3 j ohms, 
Self-inductive impedance, cross 

field: Z2= 0.025 + 0.075 j ohms, 


'!■ 


• I-- .11 . r .tii.i* * s 

* -* • . »" " .»- -.I*.". ^f-n**r:irr-i n •> 
• - ... -•... r-'STfiiiT 'irr^r^ i: ;. 

-.-- * * - ..'•"• *:;<- iiicnc-r *4\t- -nft--:. ■- 

. i j- !"!.> ••XDi»nt*:iw:^i --rni : 

* • . ■ . - .• --irr'UTt**: v ■ r:t* iTnn:' 

- • -- :- v.:; i> r: :i^-rr::t";n^- 

'■-r '!i;i»»*!>:iTii«r:. ■ r.u* - 

- r • -. !•.«*.. 1* .'4. -J.*1! .« 

■ .". ^ if: : "»-:inn"i *•■ ••::*r . 
:•■• r* »i "rrtiiMi-!'.! i!:^r:.»:; 


v^ %%il 


- :<:■:»■*".«•!] »i ■•iiiiiim:;!":. 
• ■ •-.'iir'1'* i 'fi:i!ni;'; 
• -:.' i: :: -i::u-" "■• - -je 
" >• t:**:::i: I2*»- ■•irr-rr 

■-■\" .>*:•?- i.;rr'-x::iiar.-»i 

. • . " ■ rrv i. ::: 'hi- t 
•■-- ■ " ..- • '::..'■ ■ r" ■i.'i-ri; 

* " .' ""•" ! i i iT -»i .]"- ■■'.r 

■ • • 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 421 

Choosing the e.m.f., E2f impressed upon the compensating 
winding in phase with, and its magnetic flux, therefore in quad- 
rature (approximately), behind the main field, gives a com- 
mutation in the repulsion and the series repulsion motor which 
is better than that calculated from paragraphs 221 to 224, for all 
speeds up to the speed of best commutation, but becomes in- 
ferior for speeds above this. Hence the commutation of the 
repulsion motor and of the series repulsion motor, when con- 
sidering the self-induction of commutation, is superior to the 
calculated values below, inferior above the critical speed, that 
is, the speed of minimum commutation current. The com- 
mutation of the overcompensated series motor is superior to the 
values calculated in the preceding, though not of the same 
magnitude as in the motors with quadrature commutating flux. 

It also follows that an increase of the inductive reactance of the 
armature coil increases the exponential and decreases the alter- 
nating term of e.m.f. and therewith the current in the short- 
circuited coil, and therefore requires a commutating flux earlier 
in phase than that required by an armature coil of lower reac- 
tance, hence improves the commutation of the series repulsion 
and the repulsion motor at low speeds, and spoils it at high 
speeds, as seen from the phase angles of the commutating flux 
calculated in paragraphs 221 to 224. 

Causing the armature current to lag, by inserting external 
inductive reactance into the armature circuit, has the same 
effect as leading commutating flux: it improves commutation at 
low, impairs it at high speeds. In consequence hereof the com- 
mutation of the repulsion motor with secondary excitation — 
in which the inductive reactance of the main field circuit is in 
the armature circuit — is usually superior, at moderate speeds, 
to that of the repulsion motor with primary excitation, except 
at very low speeds, where the angle of lag of the armature cur- 
rent is very large. 


420 


ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 


change of current in the armature coil when passing under the 
brush, superimposes upon the e.m.f. generated in the short- 
circuited coil, and so on the short-circuit current under the 
brush, and modifies it. the more, the higher the speed, that is, 
I lie [juicier the current change. Tiiis exponential term of e.m.f. 
generated in the armature coil short-circuited by the commutator 
brush, is the so-called "e.m.f. of self-induction of commutation." 
It exists in direct-current motors as well as in alternating-current 
motors, and is controlled by overcompensation, that is, hj i 
oommutating field in phase with the main field, and approxi- 
mately proportional to the armature current. 

The investigation of the exponential term of generated e.m.f. 
and of short-circuit current, the change of the commutation 
current and commutation factor brought about thereby IBd 
the study of the conimutating field required to control this 
exponential term leads into the theory of transient phenomena. 
that is, phenomena temporarily occurring during and immedi- 
ately after a change of circuit condition.' 

The general conclusions are: 

The control of the e.m.f. of self-induction of commutsti I 

the single-phase commutator motor requires a COmmutatlDf 
field, that is, a field in quadrature position in space to the mam 
field, approximately proportional to the armature current Ittd 
in phase with the armature current, hence approximately in 
phase with the main field. 

Since the conimutating field required to control, in the arma- 
ture coil under the commutator brush, the e.m.f. of alternation 
of the main field, is approximately in quadrature behind I he 
main field — and usually larger than the field controlling the 
e.m.f. of self-induction of commutation — it follows thai Mm 
total conimutating field, or the quadrature flux required to give 
best commutation, must be ahead of the values derived in 
paragraphs 221 to 224. 

As the field required by the e.m.f. of alternation in the -)i"ii- 
circuited coil was found to lag for speeds below the speed of brsl 
commutation, and to lead above this speed, from the poatMl 
in quadrature behind the main field, the total GOmmutatiag 
field must lead this field controlling the e.m.f. of alternation, 
and it follows: 

'See "Theory ami Calculations of Transient Electric Phenomena and 
Oscillations," Sections I and II, 


SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR MOTORS 421 

Choosing the e.m.f., E2, impressed upon the compensating 
winding in phase with, and its magnetic flux, therefore in quad- 
rature (approximately), behind the main field, gives a com- 
mutation in the repulsion and the series repulsion motor which 
is better than that calculated from paragraphs 221 to 224, for all 
speeds up to the speed of best commutation, but becomes in- 
ferior for speeds above this. Hence the commutation of the 
repulsion motor and of the series repulsion motor, when con- 
sidering the self-induction of commutation, is superior to the 
calculated values below, inferior above the critical speed, that 
is, the speed of minimum commutation current. The com- 
mutation of the overcompensated series motor is superior to the 
values calculated in the preceding, though not of the same 
magnitude as in the motors with quadrature commutating flux. 

It also follows that an increase of the inductive reactance of the 
armature coil increases the exponential and decreases the alter- 
nating term of e.m.f. and therewith the current in the short- 
circuited coil, and therefore requires a commutating flux earlier 
in phase than that required by an armature coil of lower reac- 
tance, hence improves the commutation of the series repulsion 
and the repulsion motor at low speeds, and spoils it at high 
speeds, as seen from the phase angles of the commutating flux 
calculated in paragraphs 221 to 224. 

Causing the armature current to lag, by inserting external 
inductive reactance into the armature circuit, has the same 
effect as leading commutating flux: it improves commutation at 
low, impairs it at high speeds. In consequence hereof the com- 
mutation of the repulsion motor with secondary excitation — 
in which the inductive reactance of the main field circuit is in 
the armature circuit — is usually superior, at moderate speeds, 
to that of the repulsion motor with primary excitation, except 
at very low speeds, where the angle of lag of the armature cur- 
rent is very large.
