CHAPTER VII 

SHAPING OF WAVES : GENERAL 

69. In alternating-current engineering, the sine wave, as shown 
in Fig. 46, is usually aimed at as the standard. This is not duo to 
any inherent merit of the sine wave. 

For all those pm-poses, where the energy developed by the cur- 
rent in a resistance is the object, as for incandescent lighting, 
heating, etc., any wave form is equally satisfactory, as the energy 
of the wave depends only on its effective value, but not on it^ 
shape. 

With regards to insulation stress, as in high-voltage systems, a 
flat-top wave of voltage and current, such as shown in Fig. 47, 
would be preferable, as it has a higher effective value, with tho 
same maximimi value and therefore with the same strain on tho 
insulation, and therefore transmits more energy than the sine 
wave. Fig. 46. 

Inversely, a peaked wave of voltage, such as Fig. 48, and such 
as the common saw-tooth wave of the uni tooth alternator, is 
superior in transformers and similar devices, as it transform s tho 
energy with less hysteresis loss. The peaked voltage wave. Fig. 
4:8, gives a flat-topped wave of magnetism. Fig. 47, and therciby 
transforms the voltage with a lesser maximum magnetic flux, than 
^ sine wave of the same effective value, that is, the same powc^r. 
the hysteresis loss depends on the maximum value of t\u) mag- 
5tic flux, the reduction of the maximum value of tho magncitic; 
fl^Jx, due to a peaked voltage wave, results in a lower hyHtorvMiH 
ioes, and thus higher efficiency of transformation. This reduc- 
^i^on of loss may amount to as much as 15 to 25 p(;r cent, of the 
^^otal hysteresis loss, in extreme cases. 

Inversely, a peaked voltage wave like Fig. 48 would be obj(i(j- 
t-xonable in high- voltage transmission apparatus, by giving an un- 
necessary high insulation strain, and a flat-top wave of voltage 
^vke Fig. 47, when impressed upon a transformer, would give a 
^^^ed wave of magnetism and thereby an increased hyHteresis 

Ill 


112 


ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 


The advantage of the sine wave is, that it remains unch&nged in 
shape under most conditions, while this is not the case with any- 
other wave shape, and any other wave shape thus introduces the 
danger, that under certain conditions, or in certain parts of the 
circuit, it may change to a shape which is undesirable or even 


Figs. 46 to 49. 

dangerous. Voltage, e, and current, i, are related to each other \>y 
proportionality, by differentiation and by integration, with 
sistance, r, inductance, L, and capacity, C, as factors, 

e = n, 

r di 

e = cl idt, 

and as the differentials and integrals of sines are sines, as long SB 
r, L and C are constant — which is mostly the case — sine waves of 


SHAPING OF WAVES 


113 


voltage produce sine waves of current and inversely, that is, the 
sine wave shape of the electrical quantities remains constant. 

A flat-topped current wave like Fig. 47, however, would by 
differentiation give a self-inductive voltage wave, which is peakedj 
like Fig. 48, A voltage wave like Fig. 48, which is more efficient 
in transformation, may by further distortion, as by intensifica- 
tion of the triple harmonic by line capacity, assume the shape, 


Fig. 49, and the latter then would give, when impressed upon a 
transformer, a double-peaked wave of magnetism, Fig. 50, and 
such wave of magnetism gives a magnetic cycle with two small 


i 


secondary loops at high density, as shown in Fig. 51, and an 
additional energy loss by hysteresis in these two secondary loops, 
which is considerable due to the high mean magnetic density, at 
which the secondary loop is traversed, so that in spite of the 
reduced maximum dux density, the hysteresis loss may be 
increased. 
Therefore, in alternating-current engineering, the aim gener- 


114 ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 

ally is to produce and use a wave which is a sine wave or 
nearly so. 

60. In an alternating-current generator, synchronous or in- 
duction machine, commutating machine, etc., the wave of voltage 
induced in a single armature conductor or "face conductor" 
equals the wave of field flux distribution around the periphery of 
the magnet field, modified, however, by the reluctance pulsations 
of the magnetic circuit, where such exist. As the latter produce 
higher harmonics, they are in general objectionable and to be 
avoided as far as possible. 

By properly selecting the length of the pole arc and the length 
of the air-gap between field and armature, a sinusoidal field flux 
distribution and thereby a sine wave of voltage induced in the 
armature face conductor could be produced. In this, direction, 
however, the designer is very greatly limited by economic con- 
sideration: length of pole arc, gap length, etc., are determined 
within narrow limits by the requirement of the economic use of 
the material, questions of commutation, of pole-face losses, of field 
excitation, etc., so that as a rule the field flux distribution and 
with it the voltage induced in a face conductor differs materially 
from sine shape. 

The voltage induced in a face conductor may contain even har- 
monics as well as odd harmonics, and often, as in most inductor 
alternators, a constant term. 

The constant term cancels in all turn windings, as it is equal 
and opposite in the conductor and return conductor of each turn. 
Direct-current induction (continuous, or pulsating current) thus 
is possible only in half-turn windings, that is, windings in which 
each face conductor has a collector ring at either end, so-called 
unipolar machines (see "Theory and Calculation of Electrical 
Apparatus"). 

In every winding, which repeats at every pole or 180 electrical 
degrees, as is almost always the case, the even harmonics cancel, 
even if they existed in the face conductor. In any machine in 
which the flux distribution in successive poles is the same, and 
merely opposite in direction, that is, in which the poles are symmet- 
rical, no even harmonics are induced, as the field flux distribution 
contains no even harmonics. Even harmonics would, however, 
exist in the voltage wave of a machine designed as shown diagram- 
matically in Fig. 52, as follows: 

The south poles S have about one-third the width of the north 


SHAPING OF WAVES 


115 


poles N, and the armature winding is a unitooth 60 per cent, pitch 
winding; shown as A in Fig. 52. 

Assuming sinusoidal field flux distribution in the air-gaps under 
the poles N and S of Fig. 52, curve I in Fig. 53 shows the field 
flux distribution and thus the voltage induced in a single-face con- 
ductor. Curve II shows the voltage wave in a 50 per cent, pitch 
turn and therewith that of the winding A . As seen, this contains 
a pronounced second harmonic in addition to the fundamental. 
If, then, a second 50 per cent, pitch winding is located on the arma- 


ria. 52. 

ture, shown as fi in Fig. 52, by connecting B and A in series with 
each other in such direction that the fundamentals cancel (that is, 
in opposition for the fundamental wave), we get voltage wave III 
of Fig. 53, which contains only the even harmonics, that is, is of 
double frequency. Connecting A and B in series so that the 
fundamentals add and the second harmonics cancel, gives the 
wave IV. If the machine is a three-phase F-connected alterna- 
tor, with ciu^e IV as the voltage per phase, or Y voltage, the 
delta or terminal voltage, derived by combination of two Y vol- 
tages under 60**, then is given by the curve V of Fig. 53. Fig. 54 
shows the corresponding curves for the flux distribution of uni- 
form density under the pole and tapering off at the pole corners, 
curve I, such as would approximately correspond to actual con- 


116 


ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 


ditions. As seen, curve III as well as V are approximately sine 
waves, but the one of twice the frequency of the other. Thus, 
such a machine, by reversing connections between the two wind- 
ings A and B, could be made to give two frequencies, one double 
the other, or as synchronous motor could run at two speeds, one 
one-half the other. 


Fig. 53. 


61. Distribution of the winding over an arc of the periphery^ o^ 
the armature eliminates or reduces the higher harmonics, so tti^^t 
the terminal voltage wave of an alternator with distributed wind- 
ing is less distorted, or more nearly sine-shaped, than that of ^ 
single turn of the same winding (or that of a unitooth alternator)- 
The voltage waves of successive turns are slightly out of pha^^ 
with each other, and the more rapid variations due to higher hsLMT- 
monies thus are smoothed out. In two armature turns different-'*' 


SHAPING OF WAVES 


117 


in position on the armature circumference by 8 electrical degrees 
(** electrical degrees" means counting the pitch of two poles as 
360®), the fundamental waves are 8 degrees out of phase, the third 
harmonics 35 degrees, the fifth harmonics 55 degrees, and so on, 
and their resultants thus get less and less, and becomes zero for 
that harmonic n, where n8 = 180**. 


Fig. 64. 


If 


6 = ei sin * + 63 sin 3 (*— as) + 65 sin 6 (*— as) 
+ 67 sin 7 (*— ay) + . . . 


(1) 


is the voltage wave of a single turn, and the armature winding of 
'm turns covers an arc of w electrical degrees on the armature 
periphery (per phase), the coefficients of the harmonics of the 
resultant voltage wave are 


118 


ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 


En = men avg. cos 


nu 
■^ 2 


nu 
~2 


(2) 


or, since 


+ 


no) 


avg. cos < 


2 . ncu 
= — sm -^r- 
no) 2 


ncu 


r, 2r/i . ?ia) 
-Bn = — en Sin -TT- 
nco 2 


(3) 


and 


^ = — { ei sin TT sin + "TT sin -^ sin 3(0 — as) 
0) [ 2, 6 2 

+ -g Sin -2" sin 5(0 - as) + . 


} 


(4) 


Thus, in a three-phase winding like that of the three-phase 
synchronous converter, in which each phase covers an arc of 120° 

2x .^ . 0) TT , 

= -0-, It is 2 = Q, nence, 


E = 


3m\/3 
2x 


Ci sin ^ = sin 5{<f> — as) 


+ 


^ sin 7(0 — ay) h . . . . | 


(5) 


that is, the third harmonic and all its multiples, the ninth, fif- 
teenth, etc., cancel, all other harmonics are greatly reduced, the 
more, the higher theh- order. 

In a three-phase F-connected winding, in which each phase 

TT 

covers 60° = « of the periphery, as commonly used in induction 
and synchronous machines, it is ^ = ^> hence, 

E = — I ei sin -}- ^ 63 sin 3(0 — as) + -= e^ sin 5(0 — as) 

1 2 

- = 67 sin 7(0 - ay) — Q eg sin 9(0 - ag) 

— Tj-eii sin 11(0 - an) + ^^613 sin 13(0 — a^) H • • • } (6) 


SHAPING OF WAVES 119 

Here the third harmonics do not cancel, but are especially large. 
Thus in a F-connected three-phase machine of the usual 60° 
winding, the Y voltage may contain pronounced third harmonics, 
which, however, cancel in the delta voltage. 

Thus with the distributed armature winding, which is now al- 
most exclusively used, the wave-shape distortion due to the non- 
sinusoidal distribution of the field flux is greatly reduced, that is, 
the higher harmonics in the voltage wave decreased, the more so, 
the higher their order, and very high harmonics, such as the seven- 
teenth, thirty-fifth, etc., therefore do not exist in such machines 
to any appreciable extent, except where produced by other causes. 
Such are a pulsation of the magnetic reluctance of the field due 
to the armature slots, or a pulsation of the armature reactance, as 
discussed in Chapter XXV of ** Theory and Calculation of Alter- 
nating-current Phenomena,'' or a space resonance of the armature 
conductors with some of the harmonics. The latter may occur 
if the field flux distribution contains a harmonic of such order, 
that the voltages induced by it are in phase in the successive arma- 
t\ire conductors, and therefore add, that is, when the spacing of 
the armatiu'e conductors coincides with a harmonic of the field 
flux, and the armature turn pitch and winding pitch are such that 
this harmonic does not cancel. 

Inversely, if two turns are displaced from each other on the 

1 TT 

armatiu'e periphery by - of the pole pitch, or - , and are connected 
in series, then in the resultant voltage of these two turns, the n^^ 

. TT 

harmonics are out of phase by n times - , or by tt = 180°, that is, 

are in opposition and so cancel. 

Thus in a unitooth F-connected three-phase alternator, while 
each phase usually contains a strong third harmonic, the terminal 
voltage can contain no third harmonic or its multiples: the two 
phases, which are in series between each pair of terminals, are 
one-third pole pitch, or 60 electrical degrees displaced on the 
armatiu'e periphery, and their third harmonic voltages therefore 
3 X 60 = 180° displaced, or opposite, that is, cancel, and no third 
harmonic can appear in the terminal voltage wave, or delta volt- 
age, but a pronounced third harmonic may exist — and give 
trouble — in the voltage between each terminal and the neutral, or 
the Y voltage. 

62. By the use of a fractional-pitch armature winding, higher 
harmonics can be eliminated. Assume the two sides of the arma- 


120 ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 

ture turn, conductor and return conductor, are not separated 
from each other by the full pitch of the field pole, or 180 electrical 
degrees, but by less (or more) ; that is, each armature turn or coil 
covers not the full pitch of the pole, but the part p less (or more), 
that is, covers (1 ± p) 180®. The coil then is said to be (1 ± p) 
fractional pitch, or has the pitch deficiency p. The voltages in- 
duced in the two sides of the coil then are not equal and in phase, 
but are out of phase by 180 p for the fimdamental, and by 180 
np for the n^^ harmonic. Thus, if np = 1, for this n^ har- 
monic the voltages in the two sides of the coil are equal and oppo- 
site, thus cancel, and this harmonic is eliminated. 

Therefore, two-thirds pitch winding eliminates the third har- 
monic, four-fifths pitch winding the fifth harmonic, etc. 

Peripherally displacing half the field poles against the other 
half by the fraction q of the pole pitch, or by 180 q electrical de- 
grees, causes the voltages induced by the two sets of field poles 
to be out of phase by 180 nq for the n*** harmonic, and thereby 
eliminates that harmonic, for which ng = 1. 

By these various means, if so desired, a niunber of harmonics 
can be eliminated. Thus in a F-connected three-phase alternator 
with the winding of each phase covering 60 electrical degrees, 
with four-fifths pitch winding and half the field poles offset against 
the other by one-seventh of the pole pitch, the third, fifth, and 
seventh harmonic and their multiples are eliminated, that is, the 
lowest harmonic existing in the terminal voltage of such a ma- 
chine is the eleventh, and the machine contains only the eleventh, 
thirteenth, seventeeth, ninteenth, twenty-third, twenty-ninth, 
thirty-first, thirty-seventh, etc. harmonics. As by the distrib- 
uted winding these harmonics are greatly decreased, it follows 
that the terminal voltage wave would be closely a sine, irrespec- 
tive of the field flux distribution, assuming that no slot harmonics 
exist. 

63. In modern machines, the voltage wave usually is very 
closely a sine, as the pronounced lower harm'onics, caused by the 
field flux distribution, which gave the saw-tooth, flat-top, peak 
or multiple-peak effects in the former unitooth machines, are 
greatly reduced by the distributed winding and the use of frac- 
tional pitch. Individual high harmonics, or pairs of high harmon- 
ics, are occasionally met, such as the seventeenth and ninteenth, 
or the thirty-fifth and thirty-seventh, etc. They are due to the 
pulsation of the magnetic field flux caused by the pulsation of the 


SHAPING OF WAVES 121 

field reluctance by the passage of the armature slots, and occa- 
sionally, under load, by magnetic saturation of the armature self- 
inductive flux, that is, flux produced by the current in an arma- 
ture slot and surrounding this slot, in cases where very many 
ampere conductors are massed in one slot, and the slot opening 
bridged or nearly so. 

The low harmonics, third, fifth, seventh, are relatively harm- 
less, except where very excessive and causing appreciable increase 
of the maximiun voltage, or the maximum magnetic flux ahd 
thus hysteresis loss. The very high harmonics as a rule are rela- 
tively harmless in all circuits containing no capacity, since they 
are necessarily fairly small and still further suppressed by the 
inductance of the circuit. They may become serious and even 
dangerous, however, if capacity is present in the circuit, as the 
current taken by capacity is proportional to the frequency, and 
even small voltage harmonics, if of very high order, that is, high 
frequency, produce very large currents, and these in turn may 
cause dangerous voltages in inductive devices connected in series 
into the circuit, such as current transformers, or cause resonance 
effects in transformers, etc. With the increasing extent of very 
high-voltage transmission, introducing capacity into the systems, 
it thus becomes increasingly important to keep the very high 
harmonics practically out of the voltage wave. 

Incidentally it follows herefrom, that the specifications of wave 
shape, that it should be within 5 per cent, of a sine wave, which is 
still occasionally met, has become irrational: a third harmonic of 
5 per cent, is practically negligible, while a thirty-fifth harmonic of 
5 per cent., in the voltage wave, would hardly be permissible. This 
makes it necessary in wave-shape specifications, to discriminate 
against high harmonics. One way would be, to specify not the 
wave shape of the voltage, but that of the current taken by a 
small condenser connected across the voltage. In the condenser 
current, the voltage harmonics are multiplied by their order. 
That is, the third harmonic is increased three times, the fifth 
harmonic five times, the thirty-fifth harmonic 35 times, etc. 
However, this probably overemphasizes the high harmonics, 
gives them too much weight, and a better way appears to be, to 
specify the current wave taken by a small condenser having a 
specified amount of non-inductive resistance in series. 

Thus for instance, if x = 1000 ohms = capacity reactance of 
the condenser, at fundamental frequency, r = 100 ohms = re- 


122 ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 

sistance in series to the condenser, the impedance of this circuit, 
for the n*^ harmonic, would be 

rz -^ inrk 1000. .-V 

Z„ = r-j- = 100--^j (7) 

or, absolute, the impedance. 


Zn = 1000^^ + 0.01 (8) 

and, the admittance, 

_ 0.001 n . . 

^'^ "" Vl + 0.01 n^ ^ ^ 

and therefore, the multiplying factor, 

^ _yn _ 1.005 n . 


J — 


yi 


Vl 


+ 0.01 n« 


this gives, for 


n 


f 


n 


/ 


1 


1.0 


13 


8.0 


3 


2.9 


15 


8.4 


5 


4.5 


25 


9.3 


7 


5.8 


35 


9.6 


9 


6.7 


45 


9.8 


11 


7.4 


00 


10.0 


Thus, with this proportion of resistance and capacity, the maxi- 
mum intensification is tenfold, for very high harmonics. By 
using a different value of the resistance, it can be made anything 
desired. 

A convenient way of judging on the joint effect of all harmonics 
of a voltage wave is by comparing the current taken by such a 
condenser and resistance, with that taken by the same condenser 
and resistance, at a sine wave of impressed voltage, of the same 
effective value. 

Thus, if the voltage wave 

e = 600 + I83 + 125 + 97 + 49 + 2ii + 3i3 + 3O2S + 2426 
= 600 { 1 + 0.033 + 0.025 + 0.0157 + 0.00679+ 0.0033ii 

+ 0.005 13 + 0.0523 + 0.0426 } 


SHAPING OF WAVES 123 

(where the indices indicate the order of the harmonics) of ejffect- 
ive value 

e = VeOO^ + 182 + 122 + 92 + 42 + 22 + 32 + 302 + 242 
= 601.7 

is impressed upon the condenser resistance of the admittance, ynj 
the current wave is 

i = 0.603 { 1 + 0.0878 + 0.09b + 0.0877 + 0.04459 + 0.0247ii 

+ 0.04,3 + 0.4623 + 0.3726 } 

= 0.603 X 1.173 
= 0.707 

while with a sine wave of voltage, of 60 = 601.7, the current 
would be 

io = 0.599, 

giving a ratio 

^ = 1.18, 
u 

or 18 per cent, increase of current due to wave-shape distortion by- 
higher harmonics. 

64. While usually the sine wave is satisfactory for the purpose 
for which alternating currents are used, there are numerous cases 
where waves of different shape are desirable, or even necessary 
for accomplishing the desired purpose. In other cases, by the 
internal reactions of apparatus, such as magnetic saturation, a 
wave-shape distortion may occur and requires consideration to 
avoid harmful results. 

Thus in the regulating pole converter (so-called "split-pole 
converter") variations of the direct-current voltage are produced 
at constant alternating-current voltage input, by superposing a 
third harmonic produced by the field flux distribution, as discussed 
under "Regulating Pole Converter" in "Theory and Calcula- 
tion of Electrical Apparatus." In this case, the third harmonic 
must be restricted to the local or converter circuit by proper 
transformer connections: either three-phase connection of the 
converter, or Y or double-delta connections of the transformers 
with a six-phase converter. 

The appearance of a wave-shape distortion by the third har- 
monic and its multiples, in the neutral voltage of F-connected 
transformers, and its intensifications by capacity in the secondary 


124 ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 

circuit, and elimination by delta connection, has been discussed 
in Chapter XXV of "Theory and Calculation of Alternating- 
current Phenomena." 

In the flickering of incandescent lamps, and the steadiness of 
arc lamps at low frequencies, a difference exists between the flat- 
top wave of current with steep zero, and the peaked wave with 
flat zero, the latter showing appreciable flickering already at a 
somewhat higher frequency, as is to be expected. 

In general, where special wave shapes are desirable, they are 
usually produced locally, and not by the generator design, as 
with the increasing consolidation of all electric power supply in 
large generating stations, it becomes less permissible to produce 
a desired wave shape within the generator, as this is called upon 
to supply power for all purposes, and therefore the sine wave as 
the standard is preferable. 

One of the most frequent causes of very pronoimced wave- 
shape distortion, and therefore a very convenient means of pro- 
ducing certain characteristic deviations from sine shape, is mag- 
netic saturation, and as instance of a typical wave-shape distor- 
tion, its causes and effects, this will be more fully discussed in the 
following.
