D.  C.  COMMUTATING  MACHINES 


217 


This  speed  curve  corresponds  to  a  constant  position  of  brushes 
midway  between  the  field  poles,  as  generally  used  in  railway 
motors  and  other  series  motors.  If  the  brushes  have  a  constant 
shift  or  are  shifted  proportionally  to  the  load,  instead  of  the 
saturation  curve  A  in  Fig.  121  a  curve  is  to  be  used  correspond- 
ing to  the  position  of  brushes,  that  is,  derived  by  adding  to  the 
abscissas  of  A  the  values  iq,  the  demagnetizing  effect  of  arma- 
ture reaction. 


10      60 

FIG.  121 


100     120    _110    160     ISO 

-Series  motor  speed  curve. 


The  torque  of  the  series  motor  is  shown  also  in  Fig.  121, 
derived  as  proportional  to  A  X  i,  that  is,  current  X  magnetic 
flux. 

Compound  Motors 

76.  Compound  motors  can  be  built  with  cumulative  com- 
pounding and  with  differential  compounding. 

Cumulative  compounding  is  used  to  a  considerable  extent,  as 
in  elevator  motors,  etc.,  to  secure  economy  of  current  in  starting 
and  at  high  loads  at  the  sacrifice  of  speed  regulation;  that  is,  a 
compound  motor  with  cumulative  series  field  stands  in  its  speed 
and  torque  characteristic  intermediate  between  the  shunt  motor 
and  the  series  motor. 


218     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

Differential  compounding  is  used  to  secure  constancy  of  speed 
with  varying  load,  but  to  a  small  extent  only,  since  the  speed 
regulation  of  a  shunt  motor  can  be  made  sufficiently  close,  as  was 
shown  in  the  preceding. 

Conclusion 

77.  The  preceding  discussion  of  commutating  machine  types 
can  obviously  be  only  very  general,  showing  the  main  character- 
istics of  the  curves,  while  the  individual  curves  can  be  modified 
to  a  considerable  extent  by  suitable  design  of  the  different  parts 
of  the  machine  when  required  to  derive  certain  results,  as,  for 
instance,  to  extend  the  constant-current  part  of  the  series  gen- 
erator; or  to  derive  a  wide  range  of  voltage  at  stability,  that  is, 
beyond  the  bend  of  the  saturation  curve  in  the  shunt  generator; 
or  to  utilize  the  range  of  the  shunt  generator  load  characteristic 
at  the  maximum  current  point  for  constant-current  regulation; 
or  to  secure  constancy  of  speed  in  a  shunt  motor  at  varying 
impressed  e.m.f.,  etc. 

The  use  of  the  commutating  machine  as  direct-current  con- 
verter has  been  omitted  from  the  preceding  discussion.  By 
means  of^  one  or  more  alternating-current  compensators  or 
autotransformers,  connected  to  the  armature  by  collector 
rings,  the  commutating  machine  can  be  used  to  double  or  halve 
the  voltage,  or  convert  from  one  side  of  a  three-wire  system  to 
the  other  side  and,  in  general,  to  supply  a  three-wire  Edison 
system  from  a  single  generator.  Since,  however,  the  direct- 
current  converter  and  three-wire  generator  exhibit  many  fea- 
tures similar  to  those  of  the  synchronous  converter,  as  regards 
the  absence  of  armature  reaction,  the  reduced  armature  heat- 
ing, etc.,  they  will  be  discussed  as  an  appendix  to  the  synchro- 
nous converter.
