VII.  Variable  Ratio  Converters   ("Split  Pole"  Converters) 

98.  With  a  sine  wave  of  alternating  voltage,  and  the  com- 
mutator brushes  set  at  the  magnetic  neutral,  that  is,  at  right 
angles  to  the  resultant  magnetic  flux,  the  direct  voltage  of  a 


SYNCHRONOUS  CONVERTERS        253 

converter  is  constant  at  constant  impressed  alternating  voltage. 
It  equals  the  maximum  value  of  the  alternating  voltage  between 
two  diametrically  opposite  points  of  the  commutator,  or  "dia- 
metrical voltage,"  and  the  diametrical  voltage  is  twice  the  voltage 
between  alternating  lead  and  neutral,  or  star  or  Y  voltage  of 
the  polyphase  system. 

A  change  of  the  direct  voltage,  at  constant  impressed  alter- 
nating voltage,  can  be  produced — 

Either  by  changing  the  position  angle  between  the  commu- 
tator brushes  and  the  resultant  magnetic  flux,  so  that  the  direct 
voltage  between  the  brushes  is  not  the  maximum  diametrical 
alternating  voltage  but  only  a  part  thereof, 

Or  by  changing  the  maximum  diametrical  alternating  voltage, 
at  constant  effective  impressed  voltage,  by  wave-shape  distortion 
by  the  superposition  of  higher  harmonics. 

In  the  former  case,  only  a  reduction  of  the  direct  voltage 
below  the  normal  value  can  be  produced,  while  in  the  latter 
case  an  increase  as  well  as  a  reduction  can  be  produced,  an 
increase  if  the  higher  harmonics  are  in  phase,  and  a  reduction 
if  the  higher  harmonics  are  in  opposition  to  the  fundamental 
wave  of  the  diametrical  or  Y  voltage. 

Both  methods  are  combined  in  the  so-called  "  Regulating  Pole 
Converter"  or  "Split  Pole  Converter,"  which  is  used  to  supply, 
from  constant  alternating  voltage  supply,  direct  voltage  varying 
sometimes  over  a  range  of  ±  20  per  cent. 

In  this  type  of  converter,  the  field  pole  is  divided  into  sections, 
usually  two,  a  smaller  one,  the  regulating  pole,  and  a  larger  one, 
the  main  pole.  By  varying  the  excitation  of  the  regulating  pole 
from  maximum  in  one  direction,  to  maximum  in  the  opposite 
direction,  the  direction  of  the  resultant  magnetic  field  flux,  and 
the  effective  width  of  the  field  pole,  and  with  the  latter  the 
wave  shape,  are  varied.  To  keep  the  wave  shape  variation 
local  in  the  converter,  so  as  not  to  reflect  it  into  the  primary 
supply  circuit,  the  proper  transformer  connection  must  be 
used.  This  is  Y  primary  with  preferably  A  or  double  delta 
(for  three-phase  and  for  six-phase)  or  Y  and  double  Y  or  dia- 
metrical in  the  secondary. 

Vm.     Starting 

99.  The  polyphase  converter  is  self-starting  from  rest;  that 
is,  when  connected  across  the  polyphase  circuit  it  starts,  acceler- 


254     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

ates,  and  runs  up  to  complete  synchronism.  The  e.m.f.  between 
the  commutator  brushes  is  alternating  in  starting,  with  the  fre- 
quency of  slip  below  synchronism.  Thus  a  direct-current  volt- 
meter or  incandescent  lamps  connected  across  the  commutator 
brushes  indicate  by  their  beats  the  approach  of  the  converter  to 
synchronism.  When  starting,  the  field  circuit  of  the  converter 
has  to  be  opened  or  at  least  greatly  weakened.  The  starting 
of  the  polyphase  converter  is  largely  a  hysteresis  effect  and 
entirely  so  in  machines  with  laminated  field  poles,  while  in  ma- 
chines with  solid  magnet  poles  or  with  a  short-circuited  winding 
(squirrel-cage)  in  the  field  poles,  secondary  currents  in  the  latter 
contribute  to  the  starting  torque,  but  at  the  same  time  reduce 
the  magnetic  starting  flux  by  their  demagnetizing  effect.  The 
torque  is  produced  by  the  attraction  between  the  alternating 
currents  of  the  successive  phases  upon  the  remanent  magnetism 
and  secondary  currents  produced  by  the  preceding  phase.  It 
is  necessarily  comparatively  weak,  and  from  full-load  to  twice 
full-load  current  at  from  one-third  to  one-half  of  full  voltage  is 
required  to  start  from  rest  without  load.  Usually,  low-voltage 
taps  on  the  transformers  are  used  to  give  the  lower  starting 
voltage. 

While  an  induction  motor  can  never  reach  exact  synchronism, 
but  must  even  at  no  load  slip  slightly  to  produce  the  friction 
torque,  the  converter  or  synchronous  motor  reaches  exact  syn- 
chronism, due  to  the  difference  of  the  magnetic  reluctance  in  the 
direction  of  the  field  poles  and  in  the  direction  in  electrical 
quadrature  thereto;  that  is,  the  field  structure  acts  like  a  shuttle 
armature  and  the  polar  projections  catch  with  the  rotating 
magnet  poles  in  the  armature,  in  a  similar  way  as  an  induction 
motor  armature  with  a  single  short-circuited  coil  (synchronous 
induction  motor,  reaction  machine)  drops  into  step.  Obviously, 
the  single-phase  converter  is  not  self-starting. 

At  the  moment  of  starting,  the  field  circuit  of  the  converter  is 
in  the  position  of  a  secondary  to  the  armature  circuit  as  primary; 
and  since  in  general  the  number  of  field  turns  is  very  much  larger 
than  the  number  of  armature  turns,  excessive  e.m.fs.  may  be 
generated  in  the  field  circuit,  reaching  frequently  4000  to  6000 
volts,  which  have  to  be  taken  care  of  by  some  means,  as  by 
breaking  the  field  circuit  into  sections,  or  protecting  against  ex- 
cessive voltages  by  a  squirrel-cage  starting  winding  in  the  pole 
faces.  As  soon  as  synchronism  is  reached,  which  usually  takes 


SYNCHRONOUS  CONVERTERS        255 

from  a  few  seconds  to  a  minute  or  more,  and  is  seen  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  continuous  voltage  at  the  commutator  brushes,  the 
field  circuit  is  closed  and  the  load  put  on  the  converter.  Ob- 
viously, while  starting,  the  direct-current  side  of  the  converter 
must  be  open-circuited,  since  the  e.m.f.  between  commutator 
brushes  is  alternating  until  synchronism  is  reached. 

When  starting  from  the  alternating  side,  the  converter  can 
drop  into  synchronism  at  either  polarity;  but  its  polarity  can  be 
reversed  by  strongly  exciting  the  field  in  the  right  direction  by 
some  outside  source,  as  another  converter,  etc.,  or  by  momen- 
tarily opening  the  circuit  and  thereby  letting  the  converter  slip 
one  pole. 

Since  when  starting  from  the  alternating  side  the  converter 
requires  a  very  large  and,  at  the  same  time,  lagging  current,  it 
is  occasionally  preferable  to  start  it  from  the  direct-current  side 
as  direct-current  motor.  This  can  be  done  when  connected  to 
storage  battery  or  direct-current  generator.  When  feeding  into 
a  direct-current  system  together  with  other  converters  or  con- 
verter stations,  all  but  the  first  converter  can  be  started  from 
the  continuous  current  side  by  means  of  rheostats  inserted  into 
the  armature  circuit. 

To  avoid  the  necessity  of  synchronizing  the  converter,  by  phase 
lamps,  with  the  alternating  system  in  case  of  starting  by  direct 
current  (which  operation  may  be  difficult  where  the  direct 
voltage  fluctuates,  owing  to  heavy  fluctuations  of  load,  as  rail- 
way systems),  it  is  frequently  preferable  to  run  the  converter 
up  to  or  beyond  synchronism  by  direct  current,  then  cut  off 
from  the  direct  current,  open  the  field  circuit  and  connect  it  to 
the  alternating  system,  thus  bringing  it  into  step  by  alternating 
current. 

If  starting  from  the  alternating  side  is  to  be  avoided,  and 
direct  current  not  always  available,  as  when  starting  the  first 
converter,  a  small  induction  motor  (of  less  poles  than  the  con- 
verter) is  used  as  starting  motor. 

Converters  usually  are  started  from  the  alternating  side.
