HI.  Variation  of  the  Ratio  of  Electromotive  Forces 

87.  The  preceding  ratios  of  e.m.fs.  apply  strictly  only  to  the 
generated  e.m.fs.  and  that  under  the  assumption  of  a  sine  wave 
of  alternating  generated  e.m.f. 

The  latter  is  usually  a  sufficiently  close  approximation,  since 
the  armature  of  the  converter  is  a  multi-tooth  structure,  that  is, 
contains  a  distributed  winding. 

The  ratio  between  the  difference  of  potential  at  the  commu- 
tator brushes  and  that  at  the  collector  rings  of  the  converter 
usually  differs  somewhat  from  the  theoretical  ratio,  due  to  the 
e.m.f.  consumed  in  the  converter  armature,  and  in  machines 
converting  from  alternating  to  continuous  current,  also  due  to 
the  shape  of  the  impressed  wave. 

When  converting  from  alternating  to  direct  current,  under 
load  the  difference  of  potential  at  the  commutator  brushes  is 
less  than  the  generated  direct  e.m.f.,  and  the  counter-generated 
alternating  e.m.f.  less  than  the  impressed,  due  to  the  voltage 
consumed  by  the  armature  resistance. 

If  the  current  in  the  converter  is  in  phase  with  the  impressed 
e.m.f.,  armature  self-inductance  has  little  effect,  but  reduces  the 
counter-generated  alternating  e.m.f.  below  the  impressed  with 
a  lagging  and  raises  it  with  a  leading  current,  in  the  same  way  as 
in  a  synchronous  motor. 

Thus  in  general  the  ratio  of  voltages  varies  somewhat  with  the 
load  and  with  the  phase  -relation,  and  with  constant  impressed 
alternating  e.m.f.  the  difference  of  potential  at  the  commutator 
brushes  decreases  with  increasing  load,  decreases  with  decreasing 
excitation  (lag),  and  increases  with  increasing  excitation  (lead). 

When  converting  from  direct  to  alternating  current  the  reverse 
is  the  case. 

The  direct-current  voltage  stands  in  definite  proportion  only 
to  the  maximum  value  of  the  alternating  voltage  (being  equal 
to  twice  the  maximum  star  voltage),  but  to  the  effective  value 
(or  value  read  by  voltmeter)  only  in  so  far  as  the  latter  depends 

upon  the  former,  being  =  — - 7=  maximum  value  with  a  sine  wave. 

Thus  with  an  impressed  wave  of  e.m.f.  giving  a  different  ratio 
of  maximum  to  effective  value,  the  ratio  between  direct  and 
alternating  voltage  is  changed  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  ratio 
of  maximum  to  effective;  thus,  for  instance,  with  a  flat-topped 


232     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

wave  of  impressed  e.m.f.,  the  maximum  value  of  alternating 
impressed  e.m.f.,  and  thus  the  direct  voltage  depending  there- 
upon, are  lower  than  with  a  sine  wave  of  the  same  effective 
value,  while  with  a  peaked  wave  of  impressed  e.m.f.  they  are 
higher,  by  as  much  as  10  per  cent,  in  extreme  cases. 

In  determining  the  wave  shape  of  impressed  e.m.f.  at  the  con- 
verter terminals,  not  only  the  wave  of  generator  e.m.f.,  but  also 
that  of  the  converter  counter  e.m.f.,  may  be  instrumental.  Thus, 
with  a  converter  connected  directly  to  a  generating  system  of  very 
large  capacity,  the  impressed  e.m.f.  wave  will  be  practically 
identical  with  the  generator  wave,  while  at  the  terminals  of  a 
converter  connected  to  the  generator  over  long  lines  with  re- 
active coils  or  inductive  regulators  interposed,  the  wave  of  im- 
pressed e.m.f.  may  be  so  far  modified  by  that  of  the  counter  e.m.f. 
of  the  converter  as  to  resemble  the  latter  much  more  than  the 
generator  wave,  and  thereby  the  ratio  of  conversion  may  be  quite 
different  from  that  corresponding  to  the  generator  wave. 

Furthermore,  for  instance,  in  three-phase  converters  fed  by 
ring  or  delta  connected  transformers,  the  star  e.m.f.  at  the  con- 
verter terminals,  which  determines  the  direct  voltage,  may 
differ  from  the  star  e.m.f.  impressed  by  the  generator,  by  con- 
taining different  third  and  ninth  harmonics,  which  cancel  when 
compounding  the  star  voltages  to  the  delta  voltage,  and  give 
identical  delta  voltages,  as  required. 

Hence,  the  ratios  of  e.m.fs.  given  in  Section  II  have  to  be 
corrected  by  the  drop  of  voltage  in  the  armature,  and  have  to 
be  multiplied  by  a  factor  which  is  \/2  times  the  ratio  of  effective 
to  maximum  value  of  impressed  wave  of  star  e.m.f.  (\/2  being 
the  ratio  of  maximum  to  effective  of  the  sine  wave  on  which  the 
ratios  in  Section  II  were  based),  that  is,  by  a  "form  factor" 
of  the  e.m.f.  wave. 

With  an  impressed  wave  differing  from  the  sine  shape,  there  is  a 
current  of  higher  frequency,  but  generally  of  negligible  mag- 
nitude, through  the  converter  armature,  due  to  the  difference 
between  impressed  and  counter  e.m.f.  wave.
