19.  FIELDS  OF  FORCE 

89.  When  an  electric  current  flows  through  a  conductor, 
power  is  consumed  and  heat  produced  inside  of  the  conductor. 
In  the  space  outside  and  surrounding  the  conductor,  a  change 
has  taken  place  also,  and  this  space  is  not  neutral  and  inert 
any  more,  but  if  we  try  to  move  a  solid  mass  of  metal  rapidly 
through  it,  the  motion  is  resisted,  and  heat  produced  in  the 
metal  by  induced  currents.  Materials  of  high  permeability, 
as  iron  filings,  brought  into  this  space  arrange  themselves 
in  chains;  a  magnetic  needle  is  moved  and  places  itself  in  a 
definite  direction.  Due  to  the  passage  of  the  current  in  the 
conductor,  there  are  therefore  in  the  spaces  outside  of  the  con- 
ductor —  where  the  current  does  not  flow  —  forces  exerted,  and 


FIELDS  OF  FORCE  113 

this  space  then  is  not  neutral  space,  but  has  become  a  field  of 
force,  and  the  cause  of  the  field,  in  this  case  the  electric  current 
in  the  conductor,  is  its  "motive  force."  As  in  this  case  the 
actions  exerted  in  the  field  of  force  are  magnetic,  the  space 
surrounding  a  conductor  traversed  by  a  current  is  a  field  of 
magnetic  force,  and  the  current  in  the  conductor  is  the  magneto- 
motive force. 

In  the  space  surrounding  a  ponderable  mass,  as  our  earth, 
forces  are  exerted  on  other  masses — which  cause  the  stone  to 
fall  toward  the  earth,  and  water  to  run  down  hill — and  this 
space  thus  is  a  field  of  gravitational  force,  the  earth  the  gram- 
motive  force. 

In  the  space  surrounding  conductors  having  a  high  potential 
difference,  we  observe  a  field  of  dielectric  force,  that  is,  electro- 
static or  dielectric  forces  are  exerted,  and  the  potential  difference 
between  the  conductors  is  the  electromotive  force  of  the  dielectric 
field. 

The  force  exerted  by  the  earth  as  gravimotive  force,  on  any 
mass  in  the  gravitational  field  of  the  earth,  causes  the  mass  to 
move  with  increasing  rapidity.  The  direction  of  motion  then 
shows  the  direction  in  which  the  force  acts,  that  is,  the  direc- 
tion of  the  gravitational  field.  The  force  g,  which  the  field  exerts 
on  unit  mass,  that  is,  the  acceleration  of  the  mass,  measures 
the  intensity  of  the  field:  in  the  gravitational  field  of  the  earth 
981  cm  g  sec.  The  force  acting  upon  a  mass  m,  then,  is:F  = 
gm,  and  is  called  the  weight  of  the  mass. 

In  the  same  manner,  in  the  magnetic  field  of  a  current  as 
magnetomotive  force,  the  intensity  H  of  the  magnetic  field  is 
measured  by  the  force  F  which  the  field  exerts  on  a  magnetic 
mass  or  pole  strength  m:  F  =  Hm;  the  intensity  K  of  the  di- 
electric field  of  a  potential  difference  as  electromotive  force  is 
measured  by  the  force  F  exerted  upon  an  electric  pole  strength 
e:  F  =  Ke',  the  direction  of  the  force  represents  the  direction  of 
the  field  of  force. 

90.  This  conception  of  the  field  of  force  is  one  of  the  most 
important  and  fundamental  ones  of  all  sciences  and  applied 
sciences:  a  condition  of  space,  brought  about  by  some  exciting 
cause  or  motive  force,  whereby  the  space  is  not  neutral  any 
more,  but  capable  of  exerting  forces  on  anything  susceptible  to 
these  forces:  mechanical  forces  on  masses  in  a  gravitational  field, 
magnetic  forces  on  magnetic  materials  in  a  magnetic  field, 


114     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 


A. — A  photograph  of  a  mica-filing  map  of  the  dielectric  lines  of  force- 
between  two  cylinders. 


B. — A  photograph  of  an  iron-filing  map  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  about. 

two  cylinders. 


C. — A  photographic  superposition  of  A  and  B  representing  the  magnetic- 
and  dielectric  fields  of  the  space  surrounding  two  conductors  which  are; 
carrying  energy. 

FIG.  45. 


FIELDS  OF  FORCE 


115 


dielectric  forces  on  dielectrics  in  a  dielectric  field,  etc.  The  field 
of  force  then  is  characterized  by  having,  at  any  point,  a  definite 
direction — the  direction  in  which  the  force  acts — and  a  definite 
intensity,  to  which  the  forces  are  proportional. 

Such  fields  of  force  can  be  graphically  represented  by  lines 
showing  the  direction  in  which  the  force  acts:  the  lines  of  force 
and,  at  right  angles  thereto,  the  equipotential  lines  or  surfaces, 
as  the  direction  in  which  no  force  acts.  Thus  the  lines  of  gravita- 
tional force  of  the  earth  are  the  verticals,  the  equipotential  sur- 
faces, or  level  surfaces,  are  the  horizontals.  Such  pictures  of  a 
field  of  force  also  illustrate  the  intensity:  where  the  lines  of  force 
and  therefore  the  equipotential  lines  come  closer  together,  the 
field  is  more  intense,  that  is,  the  forces  greater. 


FIG.  46. — A  mathematical  plot  of  fields  shown  in  C. 

Magnetic  fields  may  be  demonstrated  by  iron  filings  brought 
into  the  field;  dielectric  fields  by  particles  of  a  material  of  high 
specific  capacity,  such  as  mica.  Fig.  45  shows  the  dielectric 
field  of  a  pair  of  parallel  conductors,  the  magnetic  field  between 
these  conductors,  and  their  combination.  Fig.  46  shows  the  same 
as  calculated. 

As  further  illustration,  Fig.  47  shows,  from  observation,  half 
of  the  dielectric  field  between  a  rod  with  circular  disc,  as  one 
terminal,  passing  symmetrically  through  the  center  of  a  cylinder 
placed  in  a  circular  hole  in  a  plate  as  other  terminal:  the 
lines  of  force  pass  from  terminal  to  terminal;  the  equipotential 
surfaces  intersect  at  right  angles  (A  10,292). 

91.  In  electrical  engineering  we  have  to  deal  with  the  electrical 
quantities:  voltage,  current,  resistance,  etc.;  the  magnetic  quan- 


116     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

titles:  magnetic  flux,  field  intensity,  permeability,  etc.;  and  the  di- 
electric quantities:  dielectric  flux,  field  intensity,  permittivity,  etc. 
The  electric  current  is  the  magnetomotive  force  F  which  produces 
the  magnetic  field,  acting  upon  space.  It  is  expressed  in  amperes, 
or  rather  in  ampere-turns,  and  thus  is  an  electrical  quantity,  its 


Rod 


V-0 


Plane 


Hole 


FIG.  47. — Observed  dielectric  field. 


unit  being  determined  by  the  unit  of  current,  as  the  ampere-turn 
equal  to  10"1  absolute  units. 

The  magnetomotive  force  per  unit  length  of  the  magnetic 
circuit  then  is  the  magnetizing  force  or  magnetic  gradient  f, 
in  ampere-turns  per  centimeter,  hence  still  an  electrical  quantity. 

Proportional   thereto,    and   of  the   same    dimension,    is    the 


FIELDS  OF  FORCE  117 

magnetic  field  intensity  H.  It  differs  from  the  magnetic  gradient 
merely  by  a  numerical  factor  4  TT;  H  =  4?r/  10"1.  Magnetic  field 
intensity  is  a  magnetic  quantity,  and  its  unit  defined  by  the 
magnetic  forces  exerted  in  the  field,  thus  different  from  the  unit 
of  magnetic  gradient,  which  is  determined  by  the  unit  of  electric 
current;  hence  the  factor  4  IT.  The  factor  10"1  merely  reduces 
from  amperes  to  absolute  unit. 

If  then  v  is  the  magnetic  conductivity  of  the  material  in  the 
magnetic  field,  called  its  permeability,  B  =  pH  is  the  magnetic 
flux  density,  and  the  total  magnetic  flux  <1>  is  given  by  the 
density  B  times  the  area  or  section  of  the  flux. 

Or,  passing  directly  from  the  magnetomotive  force  F  to  the 

F 

magnetic  flux,  by  the  conception  of  the  magnetic  circuit:  3>  =  „> 

where  R  is  the  magnetic  resistance,  or  reluctance  of  the  magnetic 
circuit. 

R  is  an  electric  quantity,  and  does  not  contain  the  4  TT. 

In  the  dielectric  field,  the  potential  difference  e  is  the  electro- 
motive force  expressed  in  volts.  The  electromotive  force  per 
unit  length  of  the  dielectric  circuit  is  the  electrifying  force  or 
voltage  gradient  or  dielectric  gradient  g,  expressed  in  volts  per 
centimeter.  This  is  still  an  electric  quantity. 

Proportional  thereto  by  a  numerical  factor  is  the  dielectric 

quantity:    dielectric  field  intensity   K  =    .      2,   and  if  k  is  the 

dielectric  conductivity  of  the  medium  in  the  dielectric  field, 
called  specific  capacity  or  permittivity,  the  dielectric  flux  density  is 
D  =  kK,  and  the  total  dielectric  flux  ^  is  flux  density  times  area. 

Here  again,  at  the  transition  from  the  electric  quantity 
"gradient"  to  the  dielectric  quantity  " field  intensity,"  a  numer- 
ical factor  4  irv2  enters,  the  one  quantity  being  based  on  the  volt 
as  unit,  the  other  on  unit  force  action,  v  is  the  velocity  of  light, 
3  X  1010,  and  the  factor  v2  the  result  of  the  convention  of  assum- 
ing the  permittivity  of  empty  space  as  unity. 

It  is  now  easy  to  remember,  where  in  the  electromagnetic 
system  of  units  the  factor  4-Tr  enters:  it  is  at  the  transition  from 
the  electrical  quantities  to  the  magnetic  or  dielectric  quantities, 
from  gradient  to  field  intensity. 

92.  The  dielectric  field  and  the  magnetic  field  are  analogous, 
and  to  magnetic  flux,  magnetic  field  intensity,  permeability,  as 
used  in  dealing  with  magnetic  circuits,  correspond  the  terms 


118     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

dielectric  flux,  dielectric  field  intensity,  permittivity,  as  used  in 
dealing  with  the  electrostatic  fields  of  high  potential  apparatus, 
as  transmission  insulators,  transformer  bushings,  etc.  The  fore- 
most difference  is  that  in  the  magnetic  field,  a  line  of  force  must 
always  return  into  itself  in  a  closed  circuit,  while  in  the  electro- 
static or  dielectric  field,  a  line  of  force  may  terminate  in  a  con- 
ductor. The  terminals  of  the  lines  of  electrostatic  flux,  ^  at  the 
conductor,  then  are  represented  by  the  conception  of  a  quantity 
of  electricity  or  electric  charge,  Q,  being  located  on  the  con- 
ductor. Thus,  at  the  terminal  of  the  line  of  unit  dielectric  flux, 
unit  electric  quantity  is  located  on  the  conductor. 

Dielectric  flux  ^  and  electric  quantity  or  charge  Q  thus  are 
identical,  and  merely  different  conceptions  of  the  dielectric 
circuit : 

Q  =  *. 

In  using  the  conception  of  electric  quantity  Q,  we  consider 
only  the  terminals  of  the  lines  of  dielectric  flux,  that  is,  deal 
merely  with  the  effect  of  the  dielectric  flux  on  the  electric  circuit 
which  produced  it.  This  conception  is  in  many  cases  more 
convenient,  but  it  necessarily  fails,  when  the  distribution  of  the 
dielectric  flux  in  the  dielectric  field  is  of  importance,  such  as  is  the 
case  when  dealing  with  high  dielectric  field  intensities,  approach- 
ing the  possibility  of  disruptive  effects  in  the  field  of  force,  or 
when  dealing  with  the  effect  produced  by  the  introduction  of  ma- 
terials of  different  permittivity  into  the  dielectric  field.  There- 
fore, with  the  increasing  importance  of  the  dielectric  field  in 
engineering,  the  conception  of  electric  quantity,  or  charge,  is 
gradually  being  replaced  by  the  conception  of  the  dielectric  flux 
and  the  dielectric  field,  analogous  to  the  magnetic  field,  which 
has  replaced  the  previous  conception  of  "  magnetic  poles."
