XV.     Fluctuating  Cross  Currents  in  Parallel  Operation 

27.  In  alternators  operated  from  independent  prime  movers, 
it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  average  frequency  corresponding  to 
the  average  speed  of  the  prime  movers  be  the  same,  but  still 
more  important  that  the  frequency  be  the  same  at  any  instant, 
that  is,  that  the  frequency  (and  thus  the  speed  of  the  prime 
mover)  be  constant.  In  rotary  prime  movers,  as  turbines  or 
electric  motors,  this  is  usually  the  case;  but  with  reciprocating 
machines,  as  steam  engines,  the  torque  and  thus  the  speed  of 
rotation  rises  and  falls  periodically  during  each  revolution,  with 
the  frequency  of  the  engine  impulses.  The  alternator  con- 
nected with  the  engine  will  thus  not  have  uniform  frequency, 
but  a  frequency  which  pulsates,  that  is,  rises  and  falls.  The 
amplitude  of  this  pulsation  depends  upon  the  design  of  the  engine, 
the  momentum  of  its  fly-wheel,  and  the  action  of  the  engine 
governor. 

If  two  alternators  directly  connected  to  equal  steam  engines 
are  synchronized  so  that  the  moments  of  maximum  frequency 
coincide,  there  will  be  no  energy  cross  currents  between  the 
machines,  but  the  frequency  of  the  whole  system  rises  and  falls 
periodically.  In  this  case  the  engines  are  said  to  be  synchronized. 
The  parallel  operation  of  the  alternators  is  satisfactory  in  this 
case  provided  that  the  pulsations  of  engine  speeds  are  of  the 
same  size  and  duration;  but  apparatus  requiring  constant  fre- 
quency, as  synchronous  motors  and  rotary  converters,  when 
operated  from  such  a  system,  will  give  a  reduced  maximum  out- 
put, due  to  periodic  cross  currents  between  the  generators  of 
fluctuating  frequency  and  the  synchronous  motors  of  constant 
frequency,  and  in  an  extreme  case  the  voltage  of  the  whole  sys- 
tem will  be  caused  to  fluctuate  periodically.  Even  with  small 
fluctuations  of  engine  speed  the  unsteadiness  of  current  due  to  this 
source  is  noticeable  in  synchronous  motors  and  synchronous 
converters. 

If  the  alternators  happen  to  be  synchronized  in  such  a  position 
that  the  moment  of  maximum  speed  of  the  one  coincides  with 
the  moment  of  minimum  speed  of  the  other,  alternately  the 
one  and  then  the  other  alternator  will  run  ahead,  and  thus  there 


156     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

will  be  a  pulsating  power  cross  current  between  the  alternators, 
transferring  power  from  the  leading  to  the  lagging  machine, 
that  is,  alternately  from  the  one  to  the  other,  and  inversely, 
with  the  frequency  of  the  engine  impulses.  These  pulsating 
cross  currents  are  the  most  undesirable,  since  they  tend  to  make 
the  voltage  fluctuate  and  to  tear  the  alternators  out  of  synchro- 
nism with  each  other,  especially  when  the  conditions  are  favorable 
to  a  cumulative  increase  of  this  effect  by  what  may  be  called 
mechanical  resonance  (hunting)  of  the  engine  governors,  etc. 
They  depend  upon  the  synchronous  impedance  of  the  alternators 
and  upon  their  phase  difference,  that  is,  the  number  of  poles  and 
the  fluctuation  of  speed,  and  are  specially  objectionable  when 
operating  synchronous  apparatus  in  the  system. 

28.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  two  80-pole  alternators  are  directly 
connected  to  single-cylinder  engines  of  1  per  cent,  speed  varia- 
tion per  revolution,  twice  during  each  revolution  the  speed  will 
rise,  and  fall  twice;  and  consequently  the  speed  of  each  alternator 
will  be  above  average  speed  during  a  quarter  revolution.  Since 
the  maximum  speed  is  1/2  per  cent,  above  average,  the  mean 
speed  during  the  quarter  revolution  of  high  speed  is  1/4  per  cent, 
above  average  speed,  and  by  passing  over  20  poles  the  armature 
of  the  machine  will  during  this  time  run  ahead  of  its  mean  posi- 
tion by  1/4  per  cent,  of  20  or  1/20  pole,  that  is,  180/20  =  9  elec- 
trical space  degrees.  If  the  armature  of  the  other  alternator  at 
this  moment  is  behind  its  average  position  by  9  electrical  space 
degrees,  the  phase  displacement  between  the  alternator  e.m.fs.  is 
18  electrical  time  degrees;  that  is,  the  alternator  e.m.fs.  are 
represented  by  OEi  and  OEZ  in  Fig.  71,  and  when  running  in 
parallel  the  e.m.f.  OEf  =  E\E^  is  short  circuited  through  the 
synchronous  impedance  of  the  two  alternators.  . 

Since  E'  =  OE\  =  2  EI  sin  9  deg.  the  maximum  cross  current  is 

ffisin9deg.       0.156  ffi 
1    = = =  U.loo  1  o, 

20  20 

ET 

where  IQ  =  --  =  short-circuit  current  of  the  alternator  at  full- 

20 

load  excitation.  Thus,  if  the  short-circuit  current  of  the  alter- 
nator is  only  twice  full-load  current,  the  cross  current  is  31.2 
per  cent,  of  full-load  current.  If  the  short-circuit  current  is 
6  times  full-load  current,  the  cross  current  is  93.6  per  cent,  of 
full-load  current  or  practically  equal  to  full-load  current.  Thus 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  157 

the  smaller  the  armature  reaction,  or  the  better  the  regulation, 
the  larger  are  the  pulsating  cross  currents  between  the  alternators, 
due  to  the  inequality  of  the  rate  of  rotation  of  the  prime  movers. 
Hence  for  satisfactory  parallel  operation  of  alternators  connected 
to  steam  engines,  a  certain  amount  of  armature  reaction  is  de- 
sirable and  very  close  regulation  undesirable. 

By  the  transfer  of  energy  between  the  machines  the  pulsations 
of  frequency,  and  thus  the  cross  currents,  are  reduced  somewhat. 
Very  high  armature  reaction  is  objectionable  also,  since  it  reduces 
the  synchronizing  power,  that  is,  the  tendency  of  the  machines 
to  hold  each  other  in  step,  by  reducing  the  energy  transfer  be- 
tween the  machines.  As  seen  herefrom,  the  problem  of  parallel 
operation  of  alternators  is  al- 
most entirely  a  problem  of 
the  regulation  of  their  prime 

movers,       especially      steam  A ^^ 

engines. 

With  alternators  driven  by 
gas  engines,  the  problem  of 
parallel  operation  is  made 
more  difficult  by  the  more 
jerky  nature  of  the  gas-engine  ^  73._Phase  displacement  between 

impulse.      In    such   machines,  alternators  to  be  synchronized, 

therefore,  squirrel-cage  wind- 
ings in  the  field-pole  faces  are  commonly  used,  to  assist  synchron- 
izing by  the  currents  induced  in  this  short-circuited  winding,  on 
the  principle  of  the  induction  machine. 

From  Fig.  73  it  is  seen  that  the  e.m.f.  OEr  or  EiE2,  which 
causes  the  cross  current  between  two  alternators  in  parallel  con- 
nection, if  their  e.m.fs.  OEi  and  OE%  are  out  of  phase,  is  approxi- 
mately  in  quadrature  with  the  e.m.fs.  OE\  and  OE2  of  the 
machines,  if  these  latter  two  e.m.fs.  are  equal  to  each  other. 
The  cross  current  between  the  machines  lags  behind  the  e.m.f. 

producing  it,  OE* ',  by  the  angle  co,  where  tan  w  =  — ,  and  XQ  = 

7*0 

reactance,  r0  =  effective  resistance  of  alternator  armature.  The 
energy  component  of  this  cross  current,  or  component  in  phase 
with  OEfj  is  thus  in  quadrature  with  the  machine  voltages  OEi 
and  OE2,  that  is,  transfers  no  power  between  them.  The  power 
transfer  or  equalization  of  load  between  the  two  machines  takes 
place  by  the  wattless  or  reactive  component  of  cross  current, 


E' 


158     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

that  is,  the  component  which  is  in  quadrature  with  OE',  and  thus 
in  phase  with  one  and  in  opposition  with  the  other  of  the  machine 
e.m.fs.  OEi  and  OE^. 

29.  Hence,  machines  without  reactance  would  have  no  syn- 
chronizing power,  or  could  not  be  operated  in  parallel.  The 
theoretical  maximum  synchronizing  power  exists  if  the  reactance 
equals  the  resistance:  XQ  =  r0.  This  condition,  however,  cannot 
be  realized,  and  if  realized  would  give  a  dangerously  high  syn- 
chronizing power  and  cross  current.  In  practice,  XQ  is  always 
very  much  greater  than  ro,  and  the  cross  current  thus  practically 
in  quadrature  with  OE',  that  is,  in  phase  (or  opposition)  with 
the  machine  voltages,  and  is  consequently  an  energy-transfer 
current. 

If,  however,  alternators  are  operated  in  parallel  over  a  circuit 
of  appreciable  resistance,  as  two  stations  at  some  distance  from 
each  other  are  synchronized,  especially  if  the  resistance  between 
the  stations  is  non-inductive,  as  underground  cables,  with  alter- 
nators of  very  low  reactance,  as  turbo  alternators,  the  synchro- 
nizing power  may  be  insufficient.  In  this  case,  reactance  has  to  be 
inserted  between  the  stations,  to  lag  the  cross  current  and  thereby 
make  it  a  power-transferring  or  synchronizing  current. 

If,  however,  the  machine  voltages  OEi  and  OEZ  are  different 
in  value  but  approximately  in  phase  with  each  other,  the  voltage 
causing  cross  currents,  E\Ez ,  is  in  phase  with  the  machine  vol- 
tages and  the  crosscurrents  thus  in  quadrature  with  the  machine 
voltages  OEi  and  OE%,  and  hence  do  not  transfer  energy,  but  are 
wattless.  In  one  machine  the  cross  current  is  a  lagging  or 
demagnetizing,  and  in  the  other  a  leading  or  magnetizing, 
current. 

Hence  two  kinds  of  cross  currents  may  exist  in  parallel  opera- 
tion of  alternators — currents  transferring  power  between  the 
machines,  due  to  phase  displacement  between  their  e.m.fs.,  and 
wattless  currents  transferring  magnetization  between  the  ma- 
chines, due  to  a  difference  of  their  induced  e.m.fs. 

In  compound-wound  alternators,  that  is,  alternators  in  which 
the  field  excitation  is  increased  with  the  load  by  means  of  a 
series  field  excited  by  the  rectified  alternating  current,  it  is  al- 
most, but  not  quite,  as  necessary  as  in  direct-current  machines, 
when  operating  in  parallel,  to  connect  all  the  series  fields  in  paral- 
lel by  equalizers  of  negligible  resistance,  for  the  same  reason — to 
insure  proper  division  of  current  between  machines. 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  159
