IV.  Induction  Generator 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

163.  In  the  range  of  slip  from  s  =  0  to  s  =  1,  that  is,  from 
synchronism  to  standstill,  torque,  power  output,  and  power 
input  of  the  induction  machine  are  positive,  and  the  machine 
thus  acts  as  a  motor,  as  discussed  before. 

Substituting,  however,  in  the  equations  in  paragraph  1  for 
s  values  >  1,  corresponding  to  backward  rotation  of  the  ma- 
chine, the  power  input  remains  positive,  the  torque  also  remains 
positive,  that  is,  in  the  same  direction  as  for  s  <  1 ;  but  since  the 
speed  (I  —  s)  becomes  negative  or  in  opposite  direction,  the 
power  output  is  negative,  that  is,  the  torque  in  opposite  direc- 
tion to  the  speed.  In  this  case  the  machine  consumes  electrical 
energy  in  its  primary  and  mechanical  energy  by  a  torque  oppos- 
ing the  rotation,  thus  acting  as  brake. 

The  total  power,  electrical  as  well  as  mechanical,  is  con- 
sumed by  internal  losses  of  the  motor.  Since,  however,  with 
large  slip  in  a  low-resistance  motor  the  torque  and  power  are 
small,  the  braking  power  of  the  induction  machine  at  backward 


INDUCTION  MACHINES 


341 


rotation  is,  as  a  rule,  not  considerable,  excepting  when  using 
high  resistance  in  the  armature  circuit. 


Z0«  Zj-  0.1+  0.3  j     Y  -  0.01  -  0.1  J 
110  VOLTS  CONSTANT  FREQUENCY 


-1000         -2000        -3000        -4000        -5000        -6000         -7000        -8000        -9000 

FIG.  185. — Induction  generator  load  curves. 


TORQUE  POWER 
8000 


_0 

loo; 

-4000 


-6000 


113    1.2    1U    1009    0,8    0:7    o!e    0  5    0!4    Oi3    ol2    0. 


ACTI 

A    ^ 


SLIP  FACTION  OF  SYNCHROS  SM 


CONSTANT  FREQUENCY 

CONSTANT  TERMINAL 

VOLTAGE  OF  110 


Z0- 

Y  -  0.01  - 


0.4    05    060 


160 


140 


100. 


FIG.  186. — Induction  machine  speed  curves. 

Substituting  for  s  negative  values,  corresponding  to  a  speed 
above  synchronism,  torque  and  power  output  and  power  input 


342     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

become  negative,  and  a  load  curve  can  be  plotted  for  the  induc- 
tion generator  which  is  very  similar,  but  the  negative  counter- 
part of  the  induction  motor  load  curve.  It  is  for  the  machine 
shown  as  motor  in  Fig.  176  given  as  Fig.  185,  while  Fig.  186 
gives  the  complete  speed  curve  of  this  machine  from  s  =  1.5  to 
*  =  -1. 

The  generator  part  of  the  curve,  for  s  <  0,  is  of  the  same  char- 
acter as  the  motor  part,  s  >  0,  but  the  maximum  torque  and 
maximum  output  of  the  machine  as  generator  are  greater  than 
as  motor. 

Thus  an  induction  motor  when  speeded  up  above  synchronism 
acts  as  a  powerful  brake  by  returning  energy  into  the  lines,  and 
the  maximum  braking  effort  and  also  the  maximum  electric 
power  returned  by  the  machine  will  be  greater  than  the  maxi- 
mum motor  torque  or  output. 

2.  CONSTANT-SPEED  INDUCTION  OR  ASYNCHRONOUS 
GENERATOR 

154.  The  curves  in  Fig.  185  are  calculated  at  constant  fre- 
quency /,  and  thus  to  vary  the  output  of  the  machine  as  gen- 
erator the  speed  has  to  be  increased.  This  condition  may  be 
realized  in  case  of  induction  generators  running  in  parallel  with 
synchronous  generators  under  conditions  where  it  is  desirable 
that  the  former  should  take  as  much  load  as  its  driving  power 
permits;  as,  for  instance,  if  the  induction  generator  is  driven  by 
a  water  power  while  the  synchronous  generator  is  driven  by 
a  steam  engine.  In  this  case  the  control  of  speed  would  be 
effected  on  the  synchronous  generator,  and  the  induction  gen- 
erator be  without  speed-controlling  devices,  running  up  beyond 
synchronous  speed  as  much  as  required  to  consume  the  power 
supplied  to  it. 

Conversely,  however,  if  an  induction  machine  is  driven  at 
constant  speed  and  connected  to  a  suitable  circuit  as  load,  the 
frequency  given  by  the  machine  will  not  be  synchronous  with 
the  speed,  or  constant  at  all  loads,  but  decreases  with  increasing 
load  from  practically  synchronism  at  no  load,  and  thus  for  the 
induction  generator  at  constant  speed  a  load  curve  can  be  con- 
structed as  shown  in  Fig.  187,  giving  the  decrease  of  frequency 
with  increasing  load  in  the  same  manner  as  the  speed  of  the 
induction  motor  at  constant  frequency  decreases  with  the  load. 
In  the  calculation  of  these  induction  generator  curves  for  con- 


INDUCTION  MACHINES 


343 


slant  speed  the  change  of  frequency  with  the  load  has  obviously 
to  be  considered,  that  is,  in  the  equations  the  reactance  x0  has 
to  be  replaced  by  the  reactance  XQ  (1  —  s),  otherwise  the  equa- 
tions remain  the  same. 


FIG.  187. — Induction  generator  load  curves. 


3.  POWER-FACTOR  OF  INDUCTION  GENERATOR 

155.  The  induction  generator  differs  'essentially  from  a  syn- 
chronous alternator  (that  is,  a  machine  in  which  an  armature 
revolves  relatively  through  a  constant  or  continuous  magnetic 
field)  by  having  a  power-factor  requiring  leading  current ;  that 
is,  in  the  synchronous  alternator  the  phase  relation  between 
current  and  terminal  voltage  depends  entirely  upon  the  external 
circuit,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the  circuit  connected  to 
the  synchronous  alternator  the  current  can  lag  or  lead  the  ter- 
minal voltage  or  be  in  phase  therewith.  In  the  induction  or 
asynchronous  generator,  however,  the  current  must  lead  the  ter- 
minal voltage  by  the  angle  corresponding  to  the  load  and  voltage 
of  the  machine,  or,  in  other  words,  the  phase  relation  between 
current  and  voltage  in  the  external  circuit  must  be  such  as 
required  by  the  induction  generator  at  that  particular  load. 

Induction  generators  can  operate  only  on  circuits  with  lead- 
ing current  or  circuits  of  negative  effective  reactance. 


344     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

In  Fig.  188  are  given  for  the  constant-speed  induction  gen- 
erator in  Fig.  230  as  function  of  the  impedance  of  the  external 

circuit  z  =  -?•   as  abscissas  (where  eQ  =  terminal  voltage,  iQ  = 

2o 

current  in  external  circuit),  the  leading  power-factor  p  =  cos  6 
required  in  the  load,  the  inductance  factor  q  =  sin  6,  and  the 
frequency. 

Hence,  when  connected  to  a  circuit  of  impedance  z  this  induc- 
tion generator  can  operate  only  if  the  power-factor  of  its  circuit 
is  p',  and  if  this  is  the  case  the  voltage  is  indefinite,  that  is,  the 
circuit  unstable,  even  neglecting  the  impossibility  of  securing 
exact  equality  of  the  power-factor  of  the  external  circuit  with 
that  of  the  induction  generator. 


FIG.  188. — Three-phase  induction  generator  power  factor  and  inductance 
factor  of  external  circuit. 

Two  possibilities  thus  exist  with  such  an  induction  generator 
circuit. 

1st.  The  power-factor  of  the  external  circuit  is  constant  and 
independent  of  the  voltage,  as  when  the  external  circuit  consists 
of  resistances,  inductances,  and  capacities. 

In  this  case  if  the  power-factor  of  the  external  circuit  is  higher 
than  that  of  the  induction  generator,  that  is,  the  leading  current 
less,  the  induction  generator  fails  to  excite  and  generate.  If  the 
power-factor  of  the  external  circuit  is  lower  than  that  of  the 
induction  generator,  the  latter  excites  and  its  voltage  rises  until 
by  saturation  of  its  magnetic  circuit  and  the  consequent  increase 
of  exciting  admittance,  that  is,  decrease  of  internal  power-factor, 
its  power-factor  has  fallen  to  equality  with  that  of  the  external 
circuit. 


INDUCTION  MACHINES 


345 


In  this  respect  the  induction  generator  acts  like  the  direct- 
current  shunt  generator,  and  gives  load  characteristics  very 
similar  to  those  of  the  direct-current  shunt  generator  as  dis- 
cussed in  B;  that  is,  it  becomes  stable  only  at  saturation,  but 


.Z^O.I  +  O.Sjl     ATFULL 

V«0.01—  O.lj    I  FREQUENCY 


FIG.  189. — Induction  generator  and  synchronous  motor  load  curves. 

loses  its  excitation  and  thus  drops  its  load  as  soon  as  the  voltage 
falls  below  saturation. 

Since,  however,  the  field  of  the  induction  generator  is  alter- 
nating, it  is  usually  not  feasible  to  run  at  saturation,  due  to  ex- 
cessive hysteresis  losses,  except  for  very  low  frequencies. 


346     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

2d.  The  power-factor  of  the  external  circuit  depends  upon  the 
voltage  impressed  upon  it. 

This,  for  instance,  is  the  case  if  the  circuit  consists  of  a  syn- 
chronous motor  or  contains  synchronous  motors  or  synchronous 
converters. 

In  the  synchronous  motor  the  current  is  in  phase  with  the 
impressed  e.m.f.  if  the  impressed  e.m.f.  equals  the  counter  e.m.f. 
of  the  motor  plus  the  internal  loss  of  voltage.  It  is  leading  if  the 
impressed  e.m.f.  is  less,  and  lagging  if  the  impressed  e.m.f.  is 
more.  Thus  when  connecting  an  induction  generator  with  a 
synchronous  motor,  at  constant  field  excitation  of  the  latter  the 


01        02        0,3        04        05        06        017        0.8       019        IjO         11.        12       13        14        lf.5 


FIG.  190. — Induction  generator  and  synchronous  converter,  phase  control, 

no  line  impedance. 

voltage  of  the  induction  generator  rises  until  it  is  as  much  below 
the  counter  e.m.f.  of  the  synchronous  motor  as  required  to  give 
the  leading  current  corresponding  to  the  power-factor  of  the 
generator.  Thus  a  system  consisting  of  a  constant-speed  induc- 
tion generator  and  a  synchronous  motor  at  constant  field  excita- 
tion is  absolutely  stable.  At  constant  field  excitation  of  the 
synchronous  motor",  at  no  load  the  synchronous  motor  runs 
practically  at  synchronism  with  the  induction  generator,  with  a 
terminal  voltage  slightly  below  the  counter  e.m.f.  of  the  syn- 
chronous motor.  With  increase  of  load  the  frequency  and  thus 
the  speed  of  the  synchronous  motor  drops,  due  to  the  slip  of 
frequency  in  the  induction  generator,  and  the  voltage  drops, 


INDUCTION  MACHINES  347 

due  to  the  increase  of  leading  current  required  and  the  decrease 
of  counter  e.m.f.  caused  by  the  decrease  of  frequency. 

By  increasing  the  field  excitation  of  the  synchronous  motor 
with  increase  of  load,  obviously  the  voltage  of  the  generator  can 
be  maintained  constant,  or  even  increased  with  the  load. 

When  running  from  an  induction  generator,  a  synchronous 
motor  gives  a  load  curve  very  similar  to  the  load  curve  of  an 
induction  motor  running  from  a  synchronous  generator;  that  is, 
a  magnetizing  current  at  no  load  and  a  speed  gradually  decreas- 
ing with  the  increase  of  load  up  to  a  maximum  output  point,  at 
which  the  speed  curve  bends  sharply  down,  the  current  curve 
upward,  and  the  motor  drops  out  of  step. 

The  current,  however,  in  the  case  of  the  synchronous  motor 
operated  from  an  induction  generator  is  leading,  while  it  is  lag- 
ging in  an  induction  motor  operated  from  a  synchronous  genera- 
tor. In  either  case  it  demagnetizes  the  synchronous  machine 
and  magnetizes  the  induction  machine,  that  is,  the  synchronous 
machine  supplies  magnetization  to  the  induction  machine. 

In  Fig.  189  is  shown  the  load  curve  of  a  synchronous  motor 
operated  from  the  induction  generator  in  Fig.  187. 

In  Fig.  190  is  shown  the  load  curve  of  an  over-compounded 
synchronous  converter  operated  from  an  induction  generator, 
the  over-compounding  being  such  as  to  give  approximately 
constant  terminal  voltage  e. 

156.  Obviously  when  operating  a  self-exciting  synchronous 
converter  from  an  induction  generator  the  system  is  unstable 
also;  if  both  machines  are  below  magnetic  saturation,  since  in 
this  case  in  both  machines  the  generated  e.m,f.  is  proportional 
to  the  field  excitation  and  the  field  excitation  proportional  to 
the  voltage;  that  is,  with  an  unsaturated  induction  generator  the 
synchronous  converter  operated  therefrom  must  have  its  mag- 
netic field  excited  to  a  density  above  the  bend  of  the  saturation 
curve. 

Since  the  induction  generator  requires  for  its  operation  a  circuit 
with  leading  current  varying  with  the  load  in  the  manner  de- 
termined by  the  internal  constants  of  the  motor,  to  make  an 
induction  or  asynchronous  generator  suitable  for  operation  on  a 
general  alternating-current  circuit,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  syn- 
chronous machine  as  exciter  in  the  circuit  consuming  leading 
current,  that  is,  supplying  the  required  lagging  or  magnetizing 
current  to  the  induction  generator;  and  in  this  case  the  voltage 


348     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

of  the  system  is  controlled  by  the  field  excitation  of  the  syn- 
chronous machine,  that  is,  its  counter  e.m.f.  Either  a  synchro- 
nous motor  of  suitable  size  running  light  can  be  used  herefor  as 
exciter  of  the  induction  generator,  or  the  exciting  current  of  the 
induction  generator  may  be  derived  from  synchronous  motors  or 
converters  in  the  same  system,  or  from  synchronous  alternating- 
current  generators  operated  in  parallel  with  the  induction  gen- 
erator, in  which  latter  case,  however,  these  currents  can  be  said 
to  come  from  the  synchronous  alternator  as  lagging  currents. 
Electrostatic  condensers,  as  an  underground  cable  system,  may 
also  be  used  for  excitation,  but  in  this  case  besides  the  condensers  a 
synchronous  machine  or  other  means  is  required  to  secure  stability. 

The  induction  machine  may  thus  be  considered  as  consuming 
a  lagging  reactive  magnetizing  current  at  all  speeds,  and  con- 
suming a  power  current  below  synchronism,  as  motor,  supplying 
a  power  current  (that  is,  consuming  a  negative  power  current) 
above  synchronism,  as  generator. 

Therefore,  induction  generators  are  best  suited  for  circuits 
which  normally  carry  leading  currents,  as  synchronous  motor 
and  synchronous  converter  circuits,  but  less  suitable  for  circuits 
with  lagging  currents,  since  in  the  latter  case  an  additional  syn- 
chronous machine  is  required,  giving  all  the  lagging  currents 
of  the  system  plus  the  induction  generator  exciting  current. 

Obviously,  when  running  induction  generators  in  parallel  with 
a  synchronous  alternator  no  synchronizing  is  required,  but  the 
induction  generator  takes  a  load  corresponding  to  the  excess  of 
its  speed  over  synchronism,  or  conversely,  if  the  driving  power 
behind  the  induction  generator  is  limited,  no  speed  regulation 
is  required,  but  the  induction  generator  runs  at  a  speed  exceeding 
synchronism  by  the  amount  required  to  consume  the  driving 
power. 

The  foregoing  consideration  obviously  applies  to  the  polyphase 
induction  generator  as  well  as  to  the  single-phase  induction 
generator,  the  latter,  however,  requiring  a  larger  exciter  in  con- 
sequence of  its  lower  power-factor.  Therefore,  even  in  a  single- 
phase  induction  generator,  preferably  polyphase  excitation  is 
used,  that  is,  the  induction  machine  and  its  synchronous  exciter 
wound  as  polyphase  machines,  but  the  load  connected  to  one 
phase  only  of  the  induction  machine.  The  curves  shown  in  the 
preceding  apply  to  the  machine  as  polyphase  generator. 

The  effect  of  resistance  in  the  secondary  is  essentially  the 


INDUCTION  MACHINES  349 

same  in  the  induction  generator  as  in  the  induction  motor.  An 
increase  of  resistance  increases  the  slip,  that  is,  requires  an  in- 
crease of  speed  at  the  same  torque,  current,  and  output,  and  thus 
correspondingly  lowers  the  efficiency. 

Induction  generators  have  been  proposed  and  used  to  some 
extent  for  high-speed  prime  movers,  as  steam  turbines,  since 
their  squirrel-cage  rotor  appears  mechanically  better  suited  for 
very  high  speeds  than  the  revolving  field  of  the  synchronous 
generator. 

The  foremost  use  of  induction  generators  will  probably  be  for 
collecting  small  water  powers  in  one  large  system,  due  to  the  far 
greater  simplicity,  reliability,  and  cheapness  of  a  small  induction 
generator  station  feeding  into  a  big  system  compared  with  a 
small  synchronous  generator  station.  The  induction  generator 
station  requires  only  the  hydraulic  turbine,  the  induction  ma- 
chine, and  the  step-up  transformer,  but  does  not  even  require  a 
turbine  governor,  and  so  needs  practically  no  attention,  as  the 
control  of  voltage,  speed,  and  frequency  takes  place  by  a  syn- 
chronous generator  or  motor  main  station,  which  collects  the 
power  while  the  individual  induction  generator  stations  feed  into 
the  system  as  much  power  as  the  available  water  happens  to 
supply. 

The  synchronous  induction  motor,  comprising  a  single-phase 
or  polyphase  primary  and  a  single-phase  secondary,  tends  to 
drop  into  synchronism  and  then  operates  essentially  as  reaction 
machine.  A  number  of  types  of  synchronous  induction  genera- 
tors have  been  devised,  either  with  commutator  for  excitation 
or  without  commutator  and  with  excitation  by  low-frequency 
synchronous  or  commutating  machine,  in  the  armature,  or  by 
high-frequency  excitation.  For  particulars  regarding  these  very 
interesting  machines,  see  "  Theory  and  Calculation  of  Alternat- 
ing-current Phenomena."
