IX.  Inverted  Converters 

100. .  Converters  may  be  used  to  change  either  from  alter- 
nating to  direct  current  or  as  inverted  converters  from  direct  to 
alternating  current.  While  the  former  use  is  by  far  the  more 


256     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

frequent,  sometimes  inverted  converters  are  desirable.  Thus  in 
low-tension  direct-current  systems  outlying  districts  have  been 
supplied  by  converting  from  direct  to  alternating,  transmitting 
as  alternating,  and  then  reconverting  to  direct  current.  Or  in 
a  station  containing  direct-current  generators  for  short-distance 
supply  and  alternators  for  long-distance  supply,  the  converter 
may  be  used  as  the  connecting  link  to  shift  the  load  from  the 
direct  to  the  alternating  generators,  or  inversely,  and  thus  be 
operated  either  way  according  to  the  distribution  of  load  on  the 
system.  Or  inverted  operation  may  be  used  in  emergencies  to 
produce  alternating  current. 

When  converting  from  alternating  to  direct  current,  the  speed 
of  the  converter  is  rigidly  fixed  by  the  frequency,  and  cannot  be 
varied  by  its  field  excitation,  the  variation  of  the  latter  merely 
changing  the  phase  relation  of  the  alternating  current.  When 
converting,  however,  from  direct  to  alternating  current  as  the 
only  source  of  alternating  current,  that  is,  not  running  in  multiple 
with  engine-  or  turbine-driven  alternating-current  generators,  the 
speed  of  the  converter  as  direct-current  motor  depends  upon  the 
field  strength;  thus  it  increases  with  decreasing  and  decreases 
with  increasing  field  strength.  As  alternating-current  generator, 
however,  the  field  strength  depends  upon  the  intensity  and 
phase  relation  of  the  alternating  current,  lagging  current  reducing 
the  field  strength  and  thus  increasing  speed  and  frequency,  and 
leading  current  increasing  the  field  strength  and  thus  decreasing 
speed  and  frequency. 

Thus,  if  a  load  of  lagging  current  is  put  on  an  inverted  con- 
verter, as,  for  instance,  by  starting  an  induction  motor  or  another 
converter  thereby  from  the  alternating  side,  the  demagnetizing 
effect  of  the  alternating  current  reduces  the  field  strength  and 
causes  the  converter  to  increase  in  speed  and  frequency.  An  in- 
crease of  frequency,  however,  may  increase  the  lag  of  the  current, 
and  thus  its  demagnetizing  effect,  and  thereby  still  further  in- 
crease the  speed,  so  that  the  acceleration  may  become  so  rapid  as 
to  be  beyond  control  by  the  field  rheostat  and  endanger  the 
machine.  Hence  inverted  converters  have  to  be  carefully 
watched,  especially  when  starting  other  converters  from  them, 
and  some  absolutely  positive  device  is  necessary  to  cut  the  in- 
verted converter  off  the  circuit  entirely  as  soon  as  its  speed  ex- 
ceeds the  danger  limit.  The  relatively  safest  arrangement  is 
separate  excitation  of  the  inverted  converter  by  an  exciter 


SYNCHRONOUS  CONVERTERS        257 

mechanically  driven  thereby,  since  an  increase  of  speed  in- 
creases the  exciter  voltage  at  a  still  higher  rate,  and  thereby  the 
excitation  of  the  converter,  and  thus  tends  to  check  its  speed. 

This  danger  of  racing  does  not  exist  if  the  inverted  converter 
operates  in  parallel  with  alternating  generators,  provided  that 
the  latter  and  their  prime  movers  are  of  such  size  that  they 
cannot  be  carried  away  in  speed  by  the  converter.  In  an  in- 
verted converter  running  in  parallel  with  alternators  the  speed  is 
not  changed  by  the  field  excitation,  but  a  change  of  the  latter 
merely  changes  the  phase  relation  of  the  alternating  current 
supplied  by  the  converter;  that  is,  the  converter  receives  power 
from  the  direct-current  system,  and  supplies  power  into  the  alter- 
nating-current system  but  at  the  same  time  receives  wattless 
current  from  the  alternating  system,  lagging  at  under-excitation, 
leading  at  over-excitation,  and  can  in  the  same  way  as  an  ordinary 
converter  or  synchronous  motor  be  used  to  compensate  for  watt- 
less currents  in  other  parts  of  the  alternating  system,  or  to  regu- 
late the  voltage  by  phase  control.
