I.  General 

3.  The  most  important  class  of  alternating-current  apparatus 
consists  of  the  synchronous  machines.  They  comprise  the 
alternating-current  generators,  single-phase  and  polyphase,  the 
synchronous  motors,  the  phase  compensators,  the  phase  con- 
verters, the  phase  balancers,  the  synchronous  boosters  and  the 
exciters  of  induction  generators,  that  is,  synchronous  machines 
producing  wattless  lagging  or  leading  currents,  and  the  con- 
verters. Since  the  latter  combine  features  of  the  commutating 
machines  with  those  of  the  synchronous  machines  they  will  be 
considered  separately. 

In  the  synchronous  machines  the  terminal  voltage  and  the 
generated  e.m.f.  are  in  synchronism  with,  that  is,  of  the  same 
frequency  as,  the  speed  of  rotation. 

These  machines  consist  of  an  armature,  in  which  e.m.f.  is 
generated  by  the  rotation  relatively  to  a  magnetic  field,  and  a 
continuous  magnetic  field,  excited  either  by  direct  current,  or  by 
the  reaction  of  displaced  phase  armature  currents,  or  by  per- 
manent magnetism. 

The  formula  for  the  e.m.f.  generated  in  synchronous  machines, 
commonly  called  alternators,  is 

E  =     S2irn3>  =  4. 


where  n  is  the  number  of  armature  turns  in  series  interlinked 
with  the  magnetic  flux  <1>  (in  megalines  per  pole),  /  the  frequency 
of  rotation  (in  hundreds  of  cycles  per  second),  E  the  e.m.f.  gen- 
erated in  the  armature  turns. 

This  formula  assumes  a  sine  wave  of  e.m.f.     If  the  e.m.f. 
wave  differs  from  sine  shape,  the  e.m.f.  is 

E  =  4.447/n<I>, 

2  -\/2 
where  y  =  form  factor  of  the  wave,  or  —     -  times  ratio  of  effect- 

7T 

ive  to  mean  value  of  wave,  that  is,  the  ratio  ,of  the  effective 
value  of  the  generated  e.m.f.  to  that  of  a  sine  wave  generated 
by  the  same  magnetic  flux  at  the  same  frequency. 

126 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  127 

The  form  factor  7  depends  upon  the  wave  shape  of  the  gener- 
ated e.m.f.  The  wave  shape  of  e.m.f.  generated  in  a  single  con- 
ductor on  the  armature  surface  is  identical  with  that  of  the  dis- 
tribution of  magnetic  flux  at  the  armature  surface  and  will  be 
discussed  more  fully  in  the  chapter  on  commutating  machines. 
The  wave  of  total  e.m.f.  is  the  sum  of  the  waves  of  e.m.f.  in  the 
individual  conductors,  added  in  their  proper  phase  relation,  as 
corresponding  to  their  relative  positions  on  the  armature  surface. 

4.  In  a   Y  or  star-connected  three-phase  machine,  if  EQ  = 
e.m.f.  per  circuit,  or  Y  or  star  e.m.f.,  E  =  E0  \/3  is  the  e.m.f. 
between  terminals  or  A  (delta)  or  ring  e.m.f.,  since  two  e.m.fs. 
displaced  by  60  degrees  are  connected  in  series  between  terminals 
(V3  =  2  cos  30°). 

In  a  A-connected  three-phase  machine,  the  e.m.f.  per  circuit 
is  the  e.m.f.  between  the  terminals,  or  A  e.m.f. 

In  a  F-connected  three-phase  machine,  the  current  per  circuit 
is  the  current  issuing  from  each  terminal,  or  the  line  current,  or 
Y  current. 

In  a  A-connected  three-pHase  machine,  if  J0  =  current  per 
circuit,  or  A  current,  the  current  issuing  from  each  terminal,  or 
the  line  or  F  current,  is 

/  =  /o  V3. 

Thus  in  a  three-phase  system,  A  current  and  e.m.f.,  and  F 
current  and  e.m.f.  (or  ring  and  start  current  and  e.m.f.  respect- 
ively), are  to  be  distinguished.  They  stand  in  the  proportion 
1  -  V3. 

As  a  rule,  when  speaking  of  current  and  of  e.m.f.  in  a  three- 
phase  system,  under  current  the  F  current  or  current  per  line,  and 
under  e.m.f.  the  A  e.m.f.  or  e.m.f.  between  lines  is  understood. 

5.  While  the  voltage  wave  of  a  single  conductor  has  the  same 
shape  as  the  distribution  of  the  magnetic  flux  at  the  armature 
circumference  and  so  may  differ  considerably  from  a  sine,  that 
is,  contain  pronounced  higher  harmonics,  the  terminal  voltage 
is  the  resultant  of  the  waves  of  many  conductors,  and,  especially 
with  a  distributed  armature  winding,  shows  the  higher  harmonics 
in  a  much  reduced  degree;  that  is,  the  resultant  is  nearer  sine 
shape,  and  some  harmonics  may  be  entirely  eliminated  in  the 
terminal  voltage  wave,  though  they  may  appear  in  the  voltage 
wave  of  a  single  conductor.     Thus,  for  instance,  in  a  three-phase 
F-connected  machine,  the  voltage  per  circuit,  or  F  voltage,  may 
contain  a  third  harmonic  and  multiples  thereof,  while  in  the 


128     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

voltage  between  the  terminals  this  third  harmonic  is  eliminated. 
The  voltage  between  the  terminals  is  the  resultant  of  two  Y 
voltages,  displaced  from  each  other  by  60  degrees.  Sixty  de- 
grees for  the  fundamental,  however,  is  3  X  60°  =  180°,  or  oppo- 
sition for  the  third  harmonic;  that  is,  the  third  harmonics  in 
those  two  Y  voltages,  which  combine  to  the  delta  or  terminal 
voltage,  are  opposite,  and  so  neutralize  each  other. 

Even  in  a  single  turn,  harmonics  existing  in  the  magnetic  field 
and  thus  in  the  single  conductor  can  be  eliminated  by  fractional 
pitch.  Thus,  if  the  pitch  of  the  armature  turn  is  not  180  de- 
grees, but  less  by  ->  the  e.m.fs.  generated  in  the  two  conductors 

n 

of  a  single  turn  are  not  exactly  in  phase,  but  differ  by  -  of  a  half 

fl> 

wave  for  the  fundamental,  and  thus  a  whole  half  wave  for  the 
nth  harmonic,  so  that  their  nth  harmonics  are  in  opposition  and 
thus  cancel.  Fractional  pitch  winding  of  a  "pitch  deficiency"  of 

-  thus  eliminates  the  nth  harmonic;  for  instance,  with  80  per 

^  •  . 

cent,  pitch,  the  fifth  harmonic  cannot  exist. 

In  this  manner  higher  harmonics  of  the  e.m.f.  wave  can  be 
reduced  or  entirely  eliminated,  though  in  general,  with  a  dis- 
tributed winding,  the  wave  shape  is  sufficiently  close  to  sine 
shape  without  special  precaution  being  taken  in  the  design.
