III.  Armature  Reaction 

8.  The  magnetic  flux  in  the  field  of  an  alternator  under  load 
is  produced  by  the  resultant  m.m.f.  of  the  field  exciting  current 
and  of  the  armature  current.  It  depends  upon  the  phase  rela- 
tion of  the  armature  current.  The  e.m.f.  generated  by  the  field 
exciting  current  or  the  nominal  generated  e.m.f.  reaches  a  maxi- 
mum when  the  armature  coil  faces  the  position  midway  between 


FIG.  48. — Model  for  study  of  armature  reaction.     Armature  coils  in  position 
of  maximum  current. 

the  field  poles,  as  shown  in  Fig.  48,  A  and  A'.  Thus,  if  the 
armature  current  is  in  phase  with  the  nominal  generated  e.m.f., 
it  reaches  its  maximum  in  the  same  position  A,  A'  of  armature 
coil  as  the  nominal  generated  e.m.f.,  and  thus  magnetizes  the 
preceding,  demagnetizes  the  following  magnet  pole  (in  the  di- 
rection of  rotation)  in  an.  alternating-current  generator  A] 
magnetizes  the  following  and  demagnetizes  the  preceding  mag- 
net pole  in  a  synchronous  motor  A'  (since  in  a  generator  the 
rotation  is  against,  in  a  synchronous  motor  with  the  magnetic 
attractions  and  repulsions  between  field  and  armature).  In 
this  case  the  armature  current  neither  magnetizes  nor  demag- 
netizes the  field  as  a  whole,  but  magnetizes  the  one  side,  demag- 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES 


131 


netizes  the  other  side  of  each  field  pole,  and  thus  merely  distorts 
the  magnetic  field. 

9.  If  the  armature  current  lags  behind  the  nominal  generated 
e.m.f.,  it  reaches  its  maximum  in  a  position  where  the  armature 
coil  already  faces  the  next  magnetic  pole,  as  shown  in  Fig.  48, 
B  and  Br,  and  thus  demagnetizes  the  field  in  a  generator  B, 
magnetizes  it  in  a  synchronous  motor  Bf. 

If  the  armature  current  leads  the  nominal  generated  e.m.f., 
it  reaches  its  maximum  in  an  earlier  position,  while  the  arma- 
ture coil  still  partly  faces  the  pre- 
ceding magnet  pole,  as  shown  in 
Fig.  48,  C  and  C",  and  thus  mag- 
netizes the  field  in  a  generator,  Fig. 
48,  C,  and  demagnetizes  it  in  a  syn- 
chronous motor  C'. 

With  non-inductive  load,  or  with 
the  current  in  phase  with  the  ter- 
minal voltage  of  an  alternating- 
current  generator,  the  current  lags 
behind  the  nominal  generated  e.m.f., 
due  to  armature  reaction  and  self- 
inductance,  and  thus  partly  de- 
magnetizes; that  is,  the  voltage  is 
lower  under  load  than  at  no  load 
with  the  same  field  excitation.  In 
other  words,  lagging  current  demag- 
netizes and  leading  current  magne- 
tizes the  field  of  an  alternating-cur- 
rent generator,  while  the  opposite  is 
the  case  with  a  synchronous  motor. 

10.  In  Fig.  49  let  OF  =  F  =  resultant  m.m.f.  of  field  exci- 
tation and  armature  current   (the  m.m.f.  of  the  field  excita- 
tion being  alternating  with  regard  to  the  armature  coil,  due  to 
its  rotation)  and  02  the  lag  of  the  current  /  behind  the  virtual 
e.m.f.  E<2,  generated  by  the  resultant  m.m.f. 

The  virtual  e.m.f.  E2  lags  in  time  90  degrees  behind  the  result- 
ant flux  of  OF,  and  is  thus  represented  by  OE2  in  Fig.  47,  and 
the  m.m.f.  of  the  armature  current  Fa  by  OFa,  lagging  by  angle 
02  behind  OE2.  The  resultant  m.m.f.  OF  is  the  diagonal  of  the 
parallelogram  with  the  component  m.m.fs.  OFa  =  armature 
m.m.f.  and  OFQ  =  total  impressed  m.m.f.  or  field  excitation,  as 


FIG.  49. — Diagram  of  m.m.fs.  in 
loaded  generator. 


132     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 


sides,  and  from  this  construction  OFQ  is  found.  OF0  is  thus 
the  position  of  the  field  pole  with  regard  to  the  armature.  It 
is  trigonometrically, 


If  I  =  current  per  armature  turn  in  amperes  effective,  n  = 
number  of  turns  per  pole  in  a  single-phase  alternator,  the  arma- 
ture reaction  is  Fa  =  nl  ampere-turns  effective,  and  is  pulsating 
between  zero  and  nl  \/2. 

In  a  quarter-phase  alternator  with  n  turns  per  pole  and 
phase  in  series  and  I  amperes  effective  per  turn,  the  armature 
reaction  per  phase  is  nl  ampere-turns  effective  and  nl  \/2 
ampere-turns  maximum.  The  two  phases  magnetize  in  quad- 
rature, in  phase  and  in  space.  Thus,  at  the  time  t,  correspond- 
ing to  angle  6  after  the  maximum  of  the  first  phase,  the  m.m.f. 
in  the  direction  by  angle  6  behind  the  direction  of  the  magnetiza- 
tion of  the  first  phase  is  nl  \/2  cos2  6.  The  m.m.f.  of  the  second 
phase  is  nl  \/2  sin2  0;  thus  the  total  m.m.f.  or  the  armature 
reaction  Fa  =  nl  \/2,  and  is  constant  in  intensity,  but  revolves 
synchronously  with  regard  to  the  armature;  that  is,  it  is  station- 
ary with  regard  to  the  field. 

In  a  three-phaser  of  n  turns  in  series  per  pole  and  phase  and 
/  amperes  effective  per  turn,  the  m.m.f.  of  each  phase  is  nl  \/2 
ampere-turns  maximum;  thus  at  angle  6  in  positon  and  angle  0 
in  time  behind  the  maximum  of  one  phase; 

The  m.m.f.  of  this  phase  is 

nl  \/2  cos2  0. 

The  m.m.f.  of  the  second  phase  is 

nl  V2  cos2  (0  +  120)  =  n/V2  (  -  0.5  cos  0  -  0.5  \/3  sin  0)*. 
The  m.m.f.  of  the  third  phase  is 

nl  V2  cos2  (0  +  240)  =  nl  \/2  (  -  0.5  cos  0  +  0.5  \/3  sin  0)2. 
Thus  the  total  m.m.f.  or  armature  reaction, 

Fa  =  nl  \/2  (cos2  0  +  0.25  cos2  0  +  0.75  sin2  0  +  0.25  cos2  0 
+  0.75  sin2  0)  =  l.Snl  \/2, 

constant  in  intensity,  but  revolving  synchronously  with  regard 
to  the  armature,  that  is,  stationary  with  regard  to  the  field. 
These  values  of  armature  reaction  correspond  strictly  only  to 
the  case  where  all  conductors  of  the  same  phase  are  massed 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  133 

together  in  one  slot.  If  the  conductors  of  each  phase  are  dis- 
tributed over  a  greater  part  of  the  armature  surface,  the  values 
of  armature  reaction  have  to  be  multiplied  by  the  average  cosine 
of  the  total  angle  of  spread  of  each  phase. 

11.  The  single-phase  machine  thus  differs  from  the  poly- 
phase machines:  in  the  latter,  on  balanced  load,  the  armature 
reaction  is  constant,  while  in  the  single-phase  machine  the 
armature  reaction  and  thereby  the  resultant  m.m.f.  of  field  and 
armature  is  pulsating.  The  pulsation  of  the  resultant  m.m.f. 
of  the  single-phase  machine  causes  a  pulsation  of  its  magnetic 
field  under  load,  of  double  frequency,  which  generates  a  third 
harmonic  of  e.m.f.  in  the  armature  conductors.  In  machines 
of  high  armature  reaction,  as  steam-turbine-driven  single-phase 
alternators,  the  pulsation  of  the  magnetic  field  may  be  sufficient 
to  cause  serious  energy  losses  and  heating  by  eddy  currents, 
and  thus  has  to  be  checked.  This  is  usually  done  by  a  squirrel- 
cage  induction  machine  winding  in  the  field  pole  faces,  or  by 
short-circuited  conductors  laid  in  the  pole  faces  in  electrical 
space  quadrature  to  the  field  coils.  In 
these  conductors,  secondary  currents  Ei'_ 

of  double  frequency  are  produced 
which  equalize  the  resultant  m.m.f. 
of  the  machine.
