I.  General 

132.  The  direction  of  rotation  of  a  direct-current  motor, 
whether  shunt-  or  series-wound,  is  independent  of  the  direction  of 
the  current  supplied  thereto;  that  is,  when  reversing  the  current 
in  a  direct-current  motor  the  direction  of  rotation  remains  the 
same.  Thus  theoretically  any  continuous-current  motor  should 
operate  also  with  alternating  currents.  Obviously  in  this  case 
not  only  the  armature  but  also  the  magnetic  field  of  the  motor 
must  be  thoroughly  laminated  to  exclude  eddy  currents,  and  care 
taken  that  the  currents  in  the  field  and  armature  circuits  reverse 
simultaneously.  Obviously  the  simplest  way  of  fulfilling  the 
latter  condition  is  to  connect  the  field  and  armature  circuits  in 
series  as  alternating-current  series  motor.  Such  motors  are  used 
to  a  considerable  extent,  but,  like  the  shunt  motor,  have  the  dis- 
advantage of  a  commutator  carrying  alternating  currents.  • 

The  shunt  motor  on  an  alternating-current  circuit  has  the 
objection  that  in  the  armature  winding  the  current  should  be 
power  current,  thus  in  phas£  with  the  e.m.f.,  while  in  the  field 
winding  the  current  is  lagging  nearly  90  deg.,  as  magnetizing 
current.  Thus  field  and  armature  would  be  out  of  phase  with 
each  other.  To  overcome  this  objection  either  there  is  inserted 
in  series  with  the  field  circuit  a  condenser  of  such  capacity  as  to 
bring  the  current  back  into  p>hase  with  the  voltage,  or  the  field 
may  be  excited  from  a  separate  e.m.f.  differing  90  deg.  in  phase 
from  that  supplied  to  the  armature.  The  former  arrange- 
ment has  the  disadvantage  of  requiring  almost  perfect  con- 
stancy of  frequency,  and  therefore  is  not  practicable.  In  the 
latter  arrangement  the  armature  winding  of  the  motor  is  fed  by 
one,  the  field  winding  by  the  other  phase  of  a  quarter-phase  sys- 
tem, and  thus  the  current  in  the  armature  brought  approximately 
into  phase  with  the  magnetic  flux  of  the  field. 

Such  an  arrangement  obviously  loads  the  two  phases  of  the 
system  unsymmetrically,  the  one  with  the  armature  power 
current,  the  other  with  the  lagging  field  current.  To  balance 
the  system  two  such  motors  may  be  used  simultaneously  and 

306 


INDUCTION  MACHINES  307 

combined  in  one  structure,  the  one  receiving  power  current  from 
the  first,  magnetizing  current  from  the  second  phase,  the  second 
motor  receiving  magnetizing  current  from  the  first  and  power 
current  from  the  second  phase. 

The  objection  that  the  use  of  the  commutator  is  complicated 
and  greatly  limits  the  design  to  avoid  serious  sparking  can  be  en- 
tirely overcome  by  utilizing  the  alternating  feature  of  the  current ; 
that  is,  instead  of  leading  the  current  into  the  armature  by  com- 
mutator and  brushes,  producing  it  therein  by  electromagnetic 
induction,  by  closing  the  armature  conductors  upon  themselves 
and  surrounding  the  armature  by  a  primary  coil  at  right  angles  to 
the  field  exciting  coil. 

Such  motors  have  been  built,  consisting  of  two  structures  each 
containing  a  magnetizing  circuit  acted  upon  by  one  phase  and  a 
primary  power  circuit  acting  upon  a  closed-circuit  armature  as 
secondary  and  excited  by  the  other,  phase  of  a  quarter-phase 
system  (Stanley  motor) . 

Going  still  a  step  further,  the  two  structures  can  be  com- 
bined into  one  by  having  each  of  the  two  coils  fulfill  the  double 
function  of  magnetizing  the  field  and  producing  currents  in  the 
secondary  which  are  acted  upon  by  the  magnetization  produced 
by  the  other  phase. 

Obviously,  instead  of  two  phases  in  quadrature  any  number  of 
phases  can  be  used. 

This  leads  us  by  gradual  steps  of  development  from  the  con- 
tinuous-current shunt  motor  to  the  alternating-current  polyphase 
induction  motor. 

In  its  general  behavior  the  alternating-current  induction  motor 
is  therefore  analogous  to  the  continuous-current  shunt  motor. 
Like  the  shunt  motor,  it  operates  at  approximately  constant  mag- 
netic density.  It  runs  at  fairly  constant  speed,  slowing  down 
gradually  with  increasing  load.  The  main  difference  is  that  in 
the  induction  motor  the  current  in  the  armature  does  not  pass 
through  a  system  of  brushes,  as  in  the  continuous-current  shunt 
motor,  but  is  produced  in  the  armature  as  the  short-circuited 
secondary  of  a  transformer;  and  in  consequence  thereof  the 
primary  circuit  of  the  induction  motor  fulfills  the  double  func- 
tion of  an  exciting  circuit  corresponding  to  the  field  circuit  of 
the  continuous-current  machine  and  a  primary  circuit  produc- 
ing a  secondary  current  in  the  secondary  by  electromagnetic 
induction. 


308     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

133.  Since  in  the  secondary  of  the  induction  motor  the  cur- 
rents are  producjed  by  induction  from  the  primary  impressed 
currents,  the  induction  motor  in  its  electromagnetic  features  is 
essentially  a  transformer;  that  is,  it  consists  of  a  magnetic  cir- 
cuit or  magnetic  circuits  interlinked  with  two  electric  circuits 
or  sets  of  circuits,  the  primary  and  the  secondary  circuits.  The 
difference  between  transformer  and  induction  motor  is  that  in 
the  former  the  secondary  is  fixed  regarding  the  primary,  and  the 
electric  energy  in  the  secondary  is  made  use  of,  while  in  the  latter 
the  secondary  is  movable  regarding  the  primary,  and  the  me- 
chanical force  acting  between  primary  and  secondary  is  used. 
In  consequence  thereof  the  frequency  of  the  currents  in  the  sec- 
ondary of  the  induction  motor  differs  from,  and  as  a  rule  is  very 
much  lower  than,  that  of  the  currents  impressed  upon  the  pri- 
mary, and  thus  the  ratio  of  e.m.fs.  generated  in  primary  and  in 
secondary  is  not  the  ratio  of  their  respective  turns,  but  is  the  ratio 
of  the  product  of  turns  and  frequency. 

Taking  due  consideration  of  this  difference  of  frequency  be- 
tween primary  and  secondary,  the  theoretical  investigation  of  the 
induction  motor  corresponds  to  that  of  the  stationary  trans- 
former. The  transformer  feature  of  the  induction  motor  pre- 
dominates to  such  an  extent  that  in  theoretical  investigation  the 
induction  motor  is  best  treated  as  a  transformer,  and  the  elec- 
trical output  of  the  transformer  corresponds  to  the  mechanical 
output  of  the  induction  motor. 

The  secondary  of  the  motor  consists  of  two  or  more  circuits 
displaced  in  phase  from  each  other  so  as  to  offer  a  closed  sec- 
ondary to  the  primary  circuits,  irrespective  of  the  relative  motion. 
The  primary  consists  of  one  or  several  circuits. 

In  consequence  of  the  relative  motion  of  the  primary  and 
secondary,  the  magnetic  circuit  of  the  induction  motor  must  be 
arranged  so  that  the  secondary  while  revolving  does  not  leave  the 
magnetic  field  of  force.  That  means,  the  magnetic  field  of  force 
must  be  of  constant  intensity  in  all  directions,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  component  of  magnetic  flux  in  any  direction  in  space  be  of 
the  same  or  approximately  the  same  intensity  but  differing  in 
phase.  Such  a  magnetic  field  can  either  be  considered  as  the 
superposition  of  two  magnetic  fields  of  equal  intensity  in  quad- 
rature in  time  and  space,  or  it  can  be  represented  theoretically 
by  a  revolving  magnetic  flux  of  constant  intensity,  or  rotating 


INDUCTION  MACHINES  309 

field,  or  simply  treated  as  alternating  magnetic  flux  of  the  same 
intensity  in  every  direction. 

134.  The  operation  of  the  induction  motor  thus  can  also  be 
considered  as  due  to  the  action  of  a  rotating  magnetic  field  upon 
a  system  of  short-circuited  conductors.  In  the  motor  field  or 
primary,  usually  the  stator,  by  a  system  of  polyphase  impressed 
e.m.fs.  or  by  the  combination  of  a  single-phase  impressed  e.m.f. 
and  the  reaction  of  the  currents  produced  in  the  secondary,  a 
rotating  magnetic  field  is  produced.  This  rotating  field  produces 
currents  in  the  short-circuited  armature  or  secondary  winding, 
usually  the  rotor,  and  by  its  action  on  these  currents  drags  along 
the  secondary  conductors,  and  thus  speeds  up  the  armature  and 
tends  to  bring  it  up  to  synchronism,  that  is,  to  the  same  speed  as 
the  rotating  field,  at  which  speed  the  secondary  currents  would 
disappear  by  the  armature  conductors  moving  together  with  the 
rotating  field,  and  thus  cutting  no  lines  of  force.  The  secondary 
therefore  slips  in  speed  behind  the  speed  of  the  rotating  field  by 
as  much  as  is  required  to  produce  the  secondary  currents  and  give 
the  torque  necessary  to  carry  the  load.  The  slip  of  the  induction 
motor  thus  increases  with  increase  of  load,  and  is  approximately 
proportional  thereto.  Inversely,  if  the  secondary  is  driven  at  a 
higher  speed  than  that  of  the  rotating  field,  the  field  drags  the 
armature  conductors  back,  that  is,  consumes  mechanical  torque, 
and  the  machine  then  acts  as  a  brake  or  induction  generator. 

In  the  polyphase  induction  motor  this  magnetic  field  is  pro- 
duced by  a  number  of  electric  circuits  relatively  displaced  in 
space,  and  excited  by  currents  having  the  same  displacement  in 
phase  as  the  exciting  coils  have  in  space. 

In  the  single-phase  motor  one  of  the  two  superimposed  mag- 
netic quadrature  fields  is  excited  by  the  primary  electric  circuit, 
the  other  by  the .  secondary  currents  carried  into  quadrature 
position  by  the  rotation  of  the  secondary.  In  either  case,  at 
or  near  synchronism  the  magnetic  fields  are  practically  identical. 

The  transformer  feature  being  predominant,  in  theoretical 
investigations  of  induction  motors  it  is  generally  preferable  to 
start  therefrom. 

The  characteristics  of  the  transformer  are  independent  of  the 
ratio  of  transformation,  other  things  being  equal;  that  is,  dou- 
bling the  number  of  turns  for  instance,  and  at  the  same  time 
reducing  their  cross  section  to  one-half,  leaves  the  efficiency, 
regulation, etc.,  of  the  transformer  unchanged.  In  the  same  way, 


310     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

in  the  induction  motor  it  is  unessential  what  the  ratio  of  primary 
to  secondary  turns  is,  or,  in  other  words,  the  secondary  circuit 
can  be  wound  for  any  suitable  number  of  turns,  provided  the 
same  total  copper  cross  section  is  used.  In  consequence  hereof 
the  secondary  circuit  is  mostly  wound  with  one  or  two  bars  per 
slot,  to  get  maximum  amount  of  copper,  that  is,  minimum  resist- 
ance of  secondary. 

The  general  characteristics  of  the  induction  motor  being  inde- 
pendent of  the  ratio  of  turns,  it  is  for  theoretical  considera- 
tions simpler  to  assume  the  secondary  motor  circuits  reduced 
to  the  same  number  of  turns  and  phases  as  the  primary,  or  of  the 
ratio  of  transformation  1  to  1,  by  multiplying  all  secondary  cur- 
rents and  dividing  all  secondary  e.m.fs.  by  the  ratio  of  turns, 
multiplying  all  secondary  impedances  and  dividing  all  secondary 
admittances  by  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  turns,  etc. 

Thus  in  the  following  under  secondary  current,  e.m.f.,  impe- 
dance, etc.,  shall  always  be  understood  their  values  reduced  to 
the  primary,  or  corresponding  to  a  ratio  of  turns  1  to  1,  and  the 
same  number  of  secondary  as  primary  phases,  although  in  prac- 
tice a  ratio  1  to  1  will  hardly  ever  be  used,  as  not  fulfilling  the 
condition  of  uniform  effective  reluctance  desirable  in  the  start- 
ing of  the  induction  motor.
