D.  C.  COMMUTATING  MACHINES  189 

netic  flux  at  the  armature  circumference  therefore  always  has 
the  same  shape,  and  its  intensity  is  proportional  to  the  current, 
except  as  far  as  saturation  limits  it.  As  the  result  thereof, 
shifting  the  brushes  to  the  edge  of  the  field  poles,  as  in  Fig.  95, 
brings  them  in  a  field  which  is  proportional  to  the  armature  cur- 
rent and  thus  has  the  proper  intensity  as  a  commutating  field. 
Therefore  with  series-wound  machines  commutating  poles  are 
not  necessary  for  good  commutation,  but  the  shifting  of  the 
brushes  gives  the  same  result.  However,  in  cases  where  the  direc- 
tion of  rotation  frequently  reverses,  as  in  railway  motors,  the 
direction  of  the  shift  of  brushes  has  to  be  reversed  with  the  re- 
versal of  rotation.  In  railway  motors  this  cannot  be  done  with- 
out objectionable  complication,  therefore  the  brushes  have  to  be 
set  midway,  and  the  use  of  the  magnetic  flux  at  the  edge  of  the 
next  pole,  as  commutating  flux,  is  not  feasible.  In  this  case  a 
commutating  pole  is  used,  to  give,  without  mechanical  shifting 
of  the  brushes,  the  same  effect  which  a  brush  shift  would  give. 
Therefore  in  railway  motors,  especially  when  wound  for  high 
voltage,  as  1200  to  2400  volts,  a  commutating  pole  is  sometimes 
used.  This  commutating  pole,  having  a  series  winding  just 
like  the  main  pole,  changes  proportionally  with  the  main  pole. 
When  reversing  the  direction  of  rotation,  however,  the  armature 
and  the  commutating  poles  are  reversed,  while  the  main  poles 
remain  unchanged,  or  the  main  poles  are  reversed,  while  the  arma- 
ture and  the  commutating  poles  remain  unchanged;  that  is, 
the  separate  commutating  pole  becomes  necessary  because 
during  the  reversal  of  rotation  it  has  to  be  treated  differently 
from  the  main  pole. 

52.  The  commutating  pole  counteracts  the  armature  reaction 
only  at  the  place  of  commutation,  but  not  elsewhere,  and  the 
field  distribution  resulting  from  the  armature  reaction  thus  is  not 
eliminated  by  the  commutating  pole,  except  locally.  Thus  in 
machines  having  very  low  field  excitation,  and  relatively  high 
armature  reaction,  as  alternating-current  commutating  machines, 
adjustable  speed  motors  of  wide  speed  range  at  the  high-speed 
position,  boosters  near  zero  voltage,  etc.,  the  load  losses  resulting 
from  excessive  field  distortion,  the  tendency  to  instability  of 
speed,  and  the  liability  of  flashing  at  the  commutator  at  sudden 
changes  of  load  are  not  eliminated  by  the  commutating  pole, 
but  a  more  complete  neutralization  of  the  armature  reaction  is 
necessary. 


190     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 


Such  is  given  by  a  compensating  winding.  This  is  a  dis- 
tributed winding,  located  in  the  field  pole  faces  closely  adjacent 
to  the  armature,  as  shown  in  Fig.  102.  It  is  connected  in  series 
but  opposition  to  the  armature  winding,  and  of  the  same  number 
of  effective  turns  as  the  armature.  By  such  a  compensating 
winding,  the  armature  reaction  is  completely  eliminated,  and  with 
it  magnetic  distortion,  load  losses,  etc. 

By  giving  the  compensating  winding  some  more  ampere-turns 
than  the  armature,  over-compensation  is  produced,  giving  a  mag- 
netic cross  flux  under  load,  opposite  to  that  of  armature  reaction, 
that  is,  a  commutating  flux.  Very  commonly  in  such  com- 
pensated machines  merely  the 
ampere-turns  of  the  compensat- 
ing winding  in  the  slots  at  the 
commutating  zone  are  increased, 
so  that  the  compensating  wind- 
ing all  around  the  armature  ex- 
actly neutralizes  the  armature 
reaction,  except  at  the  commu- 
tating zone,  where  it  over-com- 
pensates and  thus  gives  a  local 
commutating  flux.  Such  ma- 
chines, when  properly  designed, 
are  characterized  by  absence  of 
load  losses,  stability  at  all  speeds, 
instant  recovery  at  sudden  load 

changes,  and  absence  of  sparking  at  commutator  even  at  mo- 
mentary overloads  of  several  hundred  per  cent. 


FIG.  102. — Compensated  com- 
mutating machine  with  fractional 
pitch  armature  winding.
