XI.  Double-current  Generators 

102.  Similar  in  appearance  to  the  converter,  which  changes 
from  alternating  to  direct  current,  and  to  the  inverted  converter, 
which  changes  from  direct  to  alternating  current,  is  the  double- 
current  generator;  that  is,  a  machine  driven  by  mechanical  power 
and  producing  direct  current  as  well  as  alternating  current  from 
the  same  armature,  which  is  connected  to  commutator  and  col- 
lector rings  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  converter.  Obviously  the 
use  of  the  double-current  generator  is  limited  to  those  sizes  and 
speeds  at  which  a  good  direct-current  generator  can  be  built  with 
the  same  number  of  poles  as  a  good  alternator,  that  is,  low- 
frequency  machines  of  large  output  and  relatively  high  speed; 
while  high-frequency  low-speed  double-current  generators  are 
undesirable. 

The  essential  difference  between  double-current  generator  and 
converter  is,  however,  that  in  the  former  the  direct  current  and 
the  alternating  current  are  not  in  opposition  as  in  the  latter,  but 
in  the  same  direction,  and  the  resultant  armature  polarization 
thus  the  sum  of  the  armature  polarization  of  the  direct  current 
and  of  the  alternating  current. 

Since  at  the  same  output  and  the  same  field  strength  the  arma- 
ture polarization  of  the  direct  current  and  that  of  the  alternating 
current  are  the  same,  it  follows  that  the  resultant  armature  polari- 
zation of  the  double-current  generator  is  proportional  to  the  load 
regardless  of  the  proportion  in  which  this  load  is  distributed 
between  the  alternating-  and  direct-current  sides.  The  heating  of 
the  armature  due  to  its  resistance  depends  upon  the  sum  of  the 
two  currents,  that  is,  upon  the  total  load  on  the  machine.  Hence, 
the  output  of  the  double-current  generator  is  limited  by  the 
current  heating  of  the  armature  and  by  the  field  distortion  due 
to  the  armature  reaction,  in  the  same  way  as  in  a  direct-current 
generator  or  alternator,  and  is  consequently  much  less  than  that 
of  a  converter. 

In  double-current  generators,  owing  to  the  existence  of  arma- 
ture reaction  and  consequent  field  distortion,  the  commutator 
brushes  are  more  or  less  shifted  against  the  neutral,  and  the 


260     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

direction  of  the  continuous-current  armature  polarization  is  thus 
shifted  against  the  neutral  by  the  same  angle  as  the  brushes. 
The  direction  of  the  alternating-current  armature  polarization, 
however,  is  shifted  against  the  neutral  by  the  angle  of  phase 
displacement  of  the  alternating  current.  In  consequence  thereof, 
the  reactions  upon  the  field  of  the  two  parts  of  the  armature  polari- 
zation, that  due  to  the  continuous  current  and  that  due  to  the 
alternating  current,  are  usually  different.  The  reaction  on  the 
field  of  the  direct-current  load  can  be  overcome  by  a  series  field. 
The  reaction  on  the  field  of  the  alternating-current  load  when 
feeding  converters  can  be  compensated  for  by  a  change  of  phase 
relation,  by  means  of  a  series  field  on  the  converter,  with  self- 
inductance  in  the  alternating  lines,  or  reactive  coils  at  the 
converters. 

Thus,  a  double-current  generator  feeding  on  the  alternating 
side  converters  can  be  considered  as  a  direct-current  generator  in 
which  a  part  of  the  commutator,  with  a  corresponding  part  of  the 
series  field,  is  separated  from  the  generator  and  located  at  a 
distance,  connected  by  alternating  leads  to  the  generator.  Ob- 
viously, automatic  compounding  of  a  double-current  generator  is 
feasible  only  if  the  phase  relation  of  the  alternating  current 
changes  from  lag  at  no  load  to  lead  at  load,  in  the  same  way  as 
produced  by  a  compounded  converter.  Otherwise,  rheostatic 
control  of  the  generator  is  necessary.  This  is,  for  instance,  the 
case  if  the  voltage  of  the  double-current  generator  has  to  be  varied 
to  suit  the  conditions  of  its  direct-current  load,  and  the  voltage 
of  the  converter  at  the  end  of  the  alternating  lines  varied  to  suit 
the  conditions  of  load  at  the  receiving  end,  independent  of  the 
voltage  at  the  double-current  generator,  by  means  of  alternating 
"potential  regulators  or  compensators. 

Compared  with  the  direct-current  generator,  the  field  of  the 
double-current  generator  must  be  such  as  to  give  a  much  greater 
stability  of  voltage,  owing  to  the  strong  demagnetizing  effect 
which  may  be  exerted  by  lagging  currents  on  the  alternating  side, 
and  may  cause  the  machine  to  lose  its  excitation  altogether. 
For  this  reason  it  is  frequently  preferable  to  excite  double-current 
generators  separately.  With  the  general  adoption  of  large 
three-phase  steam-turbine  units  for  electric  power  generation,  the 
use  of  inverted  converter  and  double-current  generator  has  greatly 
decreased. 


SYNCHRONOUS  CONVERTERS        261
