VH.  Frequency  Converter  or  General  Alternating-current 
Transformer 

159.  The  e.m.fs.  generated  in  the  secondary  of  the  induction 
machine  are  of  the  frequency  of  slip,  that  is,  synchronism  minus 
speed,  thus  of  lower  frequency  than  the  impressed  e.m.f.  in  the 
range  from  standstill  to  double  synchronism;  of  higher  frequency 
outside  of  this  range. ' 

Thus,  by  opening  the  secondary  circuits  of  the  induction 
machine  and  connecting  them  to  an  external  or  consumer's  cir- 
cuit, the  induction  machine  can  be  used  to  transform  from  one 
frequency  to  another,  as  frequency  converter. 

It  lowers  the  frequency  with  the  secondary  running  at  a  speed 
between  standstill  and  double  synchronism,  and  raises  the  fre- 
quency with  the  secondary  either  driven  backward  or  above 
double  synchronism. 

Obviously,  the  frequency  converter  can  at  the  same  time 
change  the  e.m.f.  by  using  a  suitable  number  of  primary  and 
secondary  turns,  and  can  change  the  phases  of  the  system  by 
having  a  secondary  wound  for  a  different  number  of  phases  from 
the  primary,  as,  for  instance,  convert  from  three  phase  6000 
volts  25  cycles  to  quarter  phase  2500  volts  62.5  cycles. 

Thus,  a  frequency  converter  can  be  called  a  "general  alter- 
nating-current transformer." 

For  its  theoretical  discussion  and  calculation,  see  "  Theory  and 
Calculation  of  Alternating-current  Phenomena." 

The  action  and  the  equations  of  the  general  alternating-current 


INDUCTION  MACHINES  355 

transformer  are  essentially  those  of  the  stationary  alternating- 
current  transformer,  except  that  the  ratio  of  secondary  to  primary 
generated  e.m.f .  is  not  the  ratio  of  turns  but  the  ratio  of.  the 
product  of  turns  and  frequency,  while  the  ratio  of  secondary 
current  and  primary  load  current  (that  is,  total  primary  current 
minus  primary  exciting  current)  is  the  inverse  ratio  of  turns. 

The  ratio  of  the  products  of  generated  e.m.f.  and  current,  that 
is,  the  ratio  of  electric  power  generated  in  the  secondary  to 
electric  power  consumed  in  the  primary  (less  excitation),  is  thus 
not  unity  but  is  the  ratio  of  secondary  to  primary  frequency. 

Hence,  when  lowering  the  frequency  with  the  secondary  re- 
volving at  a  speed  between  standstill  and  synchronism,  the 
secondary  output  is  less  than-  the  primary  input,  and  the  differ- 
ence is  transformed  into  mechanical  work;  that  is,  the  machine 
acts  at  the  same  time  as  induction  motor,  and  when  used  in  this 
manner  is  usually  connected  to  a  synchronous  or  induction  gen- 
erator feeding  preferably  into  the  secondary  circuit  (to  avoid 
double  transformation  of  its  output)  or  to  a  synchronous  con- 
verter, which  transforms  the  mechanical  power  of  the  frequency 
converter  into  electrical  power. 

When  raising  the  frequency  by  backward  rotation,  the  sec- 
ondary output  is  greater  than  the  primary  input  (or  rather  the 
electric  power  generated  in  the  secondary  greater  than  the  pri- 
mary power  consumed  by  the  generated  e.m.f.),  and  the  differ- 
ence is  to  be  supplied  by  mechanical  power  by  driving  the  fre- 
quency changer  backward  by  synchronous  or  induction  motor, 
preferably  connected  to  the  primary  circuit,  or  by  any  other 
motor  device. 

Above  synchronism  the  ratio  of  secondary  output  to  primary 
input  becomes  negative;  that  is,  the  induction  machine  generates 
power  in  the  primary  as  well  as  in  the  secondary,  the  primary 
power  at  the  impressed  frequency,  the  secondary  power  at  the 
frequency  of  slip,  and  thus  requires  mechanical  driving  power. 

The  secondary  power  and  frequency  are  less  than  the  primary 
below  double  synchronism,  more  above  double  synchronism, 
and  are  equal  at  double  synchronism,  so  that  at  double  syn- 
chronism the  primary  and  secondary  may  be  connected  in  multi- 
ple or  in  series  and  the  machine  is  then  a  double  synchronous 
alternator  further  discussed  in  the  "Theory  and  Calculation  of 
Electrical  Apparatus." 

As  far  as  its  transformer  action  is  concerned,  the  frequency 


356     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

converter  is  an  open  magnetic  circuit  transformer,  that  is,  a  trans- 
former of  relatively  high  magnetizing  current.  It  combines 
therewith,  however,  the  action  of  an  induction  motor  or  generator. 
Excluding  the  case  of  over-synchronous  rotation,  it  is  approxi- 
mately (that  is,  neglecting  internal  losses)  electrical  input  -r- 
electrical  output  -f-  mechanical  output  =  primary  frequency  -f- 
secondary  frequency  -f-  speed  or  primary  minus  secondary  fre- 
quency; that  is,  the  mechanical  output  is  negative  when  increas- 
ing the  frequency  by  backward  rotation. 

Such  frequency  converters  are  to  a  certain  extent  in  com- 
mercial use,  and  have  the  advantage  over  the  motor-generator 
plant  of  requiring  an  amount  of  apparatus  equal  only  to  the  out- 
put, while  the  motor-generator  set  requires  machinery  equal  to 
twice  the  output. 

An  application  of  the  frequency  converter  when  lowering  the 
frequency  is  made  in  concatenation  or  tandem  control  of  induc- 
tion machines,  as  described  in  the  next  section.  In  this  case 
the  first  motor,  or  all  the  motors  except  the  last  of  the  series  are 
in  reality  frequency  converters.
