XVII.  Short-circuit  Currents  of  Alternators 

31.  The  short-circuit  current  of  an  alternator  at  full-load 
excitation  usually  is  from  two  to  five  times  full-load  current, 
and  even  less  in  very  large  high-speed  steam  turbine  alternators. 
It  is 


where  EQ  =  nominal  generated  e.m.f.,  ZQ  =  synchronous  impe- 
dance of  alternator,  representing  the  combined  effect  of  arma- 
ture reaction  and  armature  self-inductance. 

In  the  first  moment  after  short  circuiting,  however,  the  current 
frequently  is  many  times  larger  than  the  permanent  short- 
circuit  current,  that  is, 


where  z  =  self-inductive  impedance  of  the  alternator. 

That  is,  in  the  first  moment  after  short  circuiting  the  poly- 
phase alternator  the  armature  current  is  limited  only  by  the  arma- 
ture self-inductance,  and  not  by  the  armature  reaction,  and 
some  appreciable  time  —  occasionally  several  seconds  —  elapses 
before  the  armature  reaction  becomes  effective. 

At  short  circuit,  the  magnetic  field  flux  is  greatly  reduced  by 
the  demagnetizing  action  of  the  armature  current,  and  the  gen- 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  161 

erated  e.m.f.  thereby  reduced  from  the  nominal  value  EQ  to  the 
virtual  value  Ez;  the  latter  is  consumed  by  the  armature  self- 
inductive  impedance  z,  or  self-inductive  reactance,  which  is 
practically  the  same  in  most  cases. 

The  armature  self-inductance  is  instantaneous,  since  the 
magnetic  field  rises  simultaneously  with  the  armature  current 
which  produces  it;  armature  reaction,  however,  requires  an  appre- 
ciable time  to  reduce  the  magnetic  flux  from  the  open-circuit 
value  to  the  much  lower  short-circuit  value,  since  the  magnetic 
field  flux  is  surrounded  by  the  field  exciting  coils,  which  act  as  a 
short-circuited  secondary  opposing  a  rapid  change  of  field  flux; 
that  is,  in  the  moment  when  the  short-circuit  current  starts  it 
begins  to  demagnetize  the  field,  and  the  magnetic  field  flux  there- 
fore begins  to  decrease;  in  decreasing,  however,  it  generates  an 
e.m.f.  in  the  field  coils,  which  opposes  the  change  of  field  flux, 
that  is,  increases  the  field  current  so  as  momentarily  to  main- 
tain the  full  field  flux  against  the  demagnetizing  action  of  the 
armature  reaction.  In  the  first  moment  the  armature  current 
thus  rises  to  the  value  given  by  the  e.m.f.  generated  by  the  full 
field  flux,  while  the  field  current  rises,  frequently  to  many  times 
its  normal  value  (hence,  if  circuit  breakers  are  in  the  field  circuit, 
they  may  open  the  circuit).  Gradually  the  field  flux  decreases, 
and  with  it  decrease  the  field  current  and  the  armature  current 
to  their  normal  values,  at  a  rate  depending  on  the  resistance 
and  the  inductance  of  the  field-exciting  circuit.  The  decrease 
in  value  of  the  field  flux  will  be  the  more  rapid  the  higher  the  re- 
sistance of  the  field  circuit,  the  slower  the  higher  the  inductance, 
that  is,  the  greater  the  magnetic  flux  of  the  machine.  Thus, 
the  momentary  short-circuit  current  of  the  machine  can  be  made 
to  decrease  somewhat  more  rapidly  by  increasing  the  resistance 
of  the  field  circuit,  that  is,  wasting  exciting  power  in  the  field 
rheostat. 

In  the  very  first  moment  the  short-circuit  current  waves  are 
unsymmetrical,  as  they  must  simultaneously  start  from  zero  in 
all  phases  and  gradually  approach  their  symmetrical  appear- 
ance, i.e.,  in  a  three-phase  machine  three  currents  displaced  by 
120  degrees.  Hereby  the  field  current  is  made  pulsating,  with  nor- 
mal or  synchronous  frequency,  that  is,  with  the  same  frequency 
as  the  armature  current.  This  full  frequency  pulsation  gradually 
dies  out  and  the  field  current  becomes  constant  with  a  polyphase 
short  circuit,  while  with  a  single-phase  short  circuit  it  remains 


162     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

pulsating  with  double  frequency,  due  to  the  pulsating  armature 
reaction.  In  a  polyphase  short  circuit  this  full  frequency  pul- 
sation due  to  the  unsymmetrical  starting  of  the  currents  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  point  of  the  wave  at  which  the  short  circuit 
starts,  since  the  resultant  asymmetry  of  all  the  polyphase  cur- 
rents is  the  same  regardless  of  the  point  of  the  wave  at  which  the 
circuit  is  closed.  In  a  single-phase  short  circuit,  however,  the 
full  frequency  pulsation  depends  on  the  point  of  the  wave  at  which 
the  circuit  is  closed,  and  is  absent  if  the  circuit  is  closed  at  that 
moment  at  which  the  short-circuit  current  would  pass  through 
zero. 

The  momentary  short-circuit  current  of  an  alternator  thus 
represents  one  of  the  few  cases  in  which  armature  self-induc- 
tance and  armature  reaction  do  not  act  in  the  same  manner,  and 
the  synchronous  reactance  can  be  split  into  two  components, 
thus,  XQ  =  x  -\-  x',  where  x  =  self-inductive  reactance,  which  is 
due  to  a  true  self-inductance,  and  x'  =  effective  reactance  of 
armature  reaction,  which  is  not  instantaneous. 

32.  In  machines  of  high  self-inductance  and  low  armature  re- 
action, as  high  frequency  alternators,  this  momentary  increase 
of  short-circuit  current  over  its  normal  value  is  negligible,  and 
moderate  in  machines  in  which  armature  reaction  and  self-in- 
ductance are  of  the  same  magnitude,  as  large  modern  multi- 
polar  low-speed  alternators.     In  large  high-speed  alternators  of 
high  armature  reaction  and  low  self -inductance,  as  steam  turbine 
alternators,  the  momentary  short-circuit  current  may  exceed  the 
permanent  value  ten  or  more  times.     With  such  large  currents 
magnetic  saturation  of  the  self-inductive  armature  circuit  still 
further  reduces  the  reactance  x,  that  is,  increases  the  current,  and 
in  such  cases  the  mechanical  shock  on  the  generator  becomes  so 
enormous  that  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  the  momentary  short-cir- 
cuit current  by  inserting  self-inductance,  that  is,  reactance  coils 
into  the  generator  leads,  or  by  specifically  designing  the  alterna- 
tor for  high  armature  reactance,  or  by  both. 

In  view  of  the  excessive  momentary  short-circuit  current,  it 
may  be*desirable  that  automatic  circuit  breakers  on  such  systems 
have  a  time  limit,  so  as  to  keep  the  circuit  closed  until  the  short- 
circuit  current  has  somewhat  decreased. 

33.  In  single-phase  machines,  and  in  polyphase  machines  in 
case  of  a  short  circuit  on  one  phase  only,  the  armature  reaction 
is  pulsating,  and  the  field  current  in  the  first  moment  after  the 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES 


163 


short  circuit  therefore  pulsates,  with  double  frequency,  and 
remains  pulsating  even  after  the  permanent  condition  has  been 
reached.  The  double  frequency  pulsation  of  the  field  current 
in  case  of  a  single-phase  short  circuit  generates  in  the  armature 
a  third  harmonic  of  e.m.f.  The  short-circuit  current  wave  be- 
comes greatly  distorted  thereby,  showing  the  saw-tooth  shape 
characteristics  of  the  third  harmonic,  and  in  a  polyphase  machine 
on  single-phase  short  circuit,  in  the  phase  in  quadrature  with  the 
short-circuited  phase,  a  very  high  voltage  appears,  which  is  greatly 


Field  Current 


Armature  Current 


FIG.  74. — Three-phase  short-circuit  current  in  a  turbo-alternator. 

distorted  by  the  third  harmonic  and  may  reach  several  times 
the  value  of  the  open-circuit  voltage.  Thus,  with  a  single- 
phase  short  circuit  on  a  polyphase  system,  destructive  voltages 
may  appear  in  the  open-circuited  phase,  of  saw-tooth  wave  shape. 
Upon-  this  double  frequency  pulsation  of  the  field  current 
during  a  single-phase  short  circuit  the  transient  full  frequency 
pulsation  resulting  from  the  unsymmetrical  start  of  the  armature 
current  is  superimposed  and  thus  causes  a  difference  in  the  in- 
tensity of  successive  waves  of  the  double  frequency  pulsation, 


164     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

which  gradually  disappears  with  the  dying  out  of  the  transient 
full  frequency  pulsation,  and  depends  upon  the  point  of  the  wave 
at  which  the  short  circuit  is  closed,  and  thus  is  absent,  and  the 


Armature 
current. 


Field 
Current 


FIG.  75. — Single-phase    short-circuit    current    in     a    three-phase     turbo- 
alternator. 


.Armature 
current 


Field 
current 

52.5  amp. 


EJ  amp. 


FIG.  76. — Single-phase    short-circuit    current    in    a    three-phase    turbo- 
alternator. 

double  frequency  pulsation  symmetrical,  if  the  circuit  is  closed  at 
the  moment  when  the  short-circuit  current  should  be  zero. 

34.  As  illustration  is  shown,  in  Fig.  74,  the  oscillogram  of 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  165 

one  phase  of  the  three-phase  short  circuit  of  a  three-phase  turbo- 
alternator,  giving  the  unsymmetrical  start  of  the  armature 
currents  and  the  full  frequency  pulsation  of  the  field  current. 

In  Fig.  75  is  shown  a  single-phase  short  circuit  of  the  same 
machine,  in  which  the  circuit  is  closed  at  the  zero  value  of  the 
current;  the  current  wave  therefore  is  symmetrical,  and  the  field 
current  shows  only  the  double  frequency  pulsation  due  to  the 
single-phase  armature  reaction. 

In  Fig.  76  is  shown  another  single-phase  short  circuit,  in  which 
the  armature  current  wave  starts  unsymmetrical,  thus  giving  a 
transient  full  frequency  term  in  the  field  current.  Thus  in  the 
double  frequency  pulsation  of  the  field  current  at  first  large  and 
small  waves  alternate,  but  the  successive  waves  gradually  be- 
come equal  with  the  dying  out  of  the  full  frequency  term. 

In  Figs.  75  and  76  the  oscillogram  is  cut  off  by  the  open- 
ing of  the  circuit  breaker. 

For  further  discussion,  and  the  theoretical  investigation  of 
momentary  short-circuit  currents,  see  "Theory  and  Calculation 
of  Transient  Electric  Phenomena  and  Oscillations,"  Part  I, 
Chapters  XI  and  XII. 

For  further  discussion  of  the  terms  reactance,  armature  re- 
action and  field  excitation  and  their  relation,  see  "Theory  and 
Calculation  of  Electric  Circuits. " 


11 


B.  DIRECT-CURRENT  COMMUTATING  MACHINES
