II.  Electromotive  Forces 

6.  In  a  synchronous  machine  we  have  to  distinguish  between 
terminal  voltage  E,  real  generated  e.m.f.  #1,  virtual  generated 
e.m.f.  EZ,  and  nominal  generated  e.m.f.  EQ. 

The  real  generated  e.m.f.  EI  is  the  e.m.f.  generated  in  the  alter- 
nator armature  turns  by  the  resultant  magnetic  flux,  or  mag- 
netic flux  interlinked  with  them,  that  is,  by  the  magnetic  flux 
passing  through  the  armature  core.  It  is  equal  to  the  terminal 
voltage  plus  the  e.m.f.  consumed  by  the  resistance  of  the  arma- 
ture, these  two  e.m.fs.  being  taken  in  their  proper  phase  relation; 
thus 

Ei  =  E  +  Ir, 

where  /  =  current  in  armature,  r  =  effective  resistance. 

The  virtual  generated  e.m.f.  E2  is  the  e.m.f.  which  would  be 
generated  by  the  flux  produced  by  the  field  poles,  or  flux  corre- 
sponding to  the  resultant  m.m.f.,  that  is,  the  resultant  of  the 


SYNCHRONOUS  MACHINES  129 

m.m.fs.  of  field  excitation  and  of  armature  reaction.  Since  the 
magnetic  flux  produced  by  the  armature,  or  flux  of  armature 
self-inductance,  combines  with  the  field  flux  to  the  resultant  flux, 
the  flux  produced  by  the  field  poles  does  not  pass  through  the 
armature  completely,  and  the  virtual  e.m.f.  and  the  real  gener- 
ated e.m.f.  differ  from  each  other  by  the  e.m.f.  of  armature  self- 
inductance;  but  the  virtual  generated  e.m.f.,  as  well  as  the  e.m.f. 
generated  in  the  armature  by  self-inductance,  have  no  real  and 
independent  existence,  but  are  merely  fictitious  components  of 
the  real  or  resultant  generated  e.m.f.  EI. 
The  virtual  generated  e.m.f.  is 

Ei  =  Et  +  jlx, 

where  x  is  the  self -inductive  armature  reactance,  and  the  e.m.f 
consumed  by  self-inductance  Ix  is  to  be  combined  with  the  real 
generated  e.m.f.  EI  in  the  proper  phase  relation. 

7.  The  nominal  generated  e.m.f.  EQ  is  the  e.m.f.  which  would 
be  generated  by  the  field  excitation  if  there  were  neither  self- 
inductance  nor  armature  reaction,  and  the  saturation  were  the 
same  as  corresponds  to  the  real  generated  e.m.f.  It  thus  does 
not  correspond  to  any  magnetic  flux,  and  has  no  existence  at  all, 
but  is  merely  a  fictitious  quantity,  which,  however,  is  very  useful 
for  the  investigation  of  alternators  by  allowing  the  combination 
of  armature  reaction  and  self-inductance  into  a  single  effect  by 
a  (fictitious)  self-inductance  or  synchronous  reactance  XQ.  The 
nominal  generated  e.m.f.  would  be  the  terminal  voltage  with 
open  circuit  and  load  excitation  if  the  saturation  curve  were  a 
straight  line. 

The  synchronous  reactance  XQ  is  thus  a  quantity  combining 
armature  reaction  and  self-inductance  of  the  alternator.  It  is 
the  only  quantity  which  can  easily  be  determined  by  experiment 
by  running  the  alternator  on  short  circuit  with  excited  field.  If 
in  this  case  IQ  =  current,  PQ  =  loss  of  power  in  the  armature 

coils,  EQ  =  e.m.f.  corresponding  to  the  field  excitation  at  open 
w  p 

circuit,  7—  =  ZQ  is  the  synchronous  impedance,  y^  =  r0  is  the 
-to  J-o 

effective  resistance  (ohmic  resistance  plus  load  losses),  and 
XQ  =  A/202  —  ro2  the  synchronous  reactance. 

In  this  feature  lies  the  importance  of  the  term  "  nominal 
generated  e.m.f."  EQ, 

E0  =  Ei  +  J!XQ,  =  E  +  (r  +  jx)  I 


130     ELEMENTS  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING 

the  terms  being  combined  in  their  proper  phase  relation.  In  a 
polyphase  machine,  these  considerations  apply  to  each  of  the 
machine  circuits  individually.
