CHAPTER XXVI 
EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 

251. To elucidate the variation in the shape of alternating 
waves caused by various harmonics, in Figs. 185 and 186 are 
shown the wave-forms produced by the superposition of the 


P44S4t 


4i' 


Fig. 185. 

triple and the quintuple harmonic upon the fundamental sine 
wave. 

In Fig. 185 is shown the fundamental sine wave and the com- 
plex waves produced by the superposition of a triple harmonic 
of 30 per cent, the amphtude of the fundamental, under the rela- 
24 369 


370 


AL TERN A TING-C URREN T PHENOMENA 


tive phase displacments of 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, and 180°, repre- 
sented by the equations: 

sin /3 

sin |8 - 0.3 sin 3 /S 

sin /3 - 0.3 sin (3 /3 - 45°) 

sin /3 - 0.3 sin (3 /3 ~ 90°) 

sin )8 - 0.3 sin (3 /S - 135°) 

sin ^ - 0.3 sin (3 ^ - 180°). 


^^.^. 


4i^ 
ft 


Fig. 186. 

As seen, the effect of the triple harmonic is, in the first figure, 
to flatten the zero values and point the maximum values of the 
wave, giving what is called a peaked wave. With increasing 
phase displacement of the triple harmonic, the flat zero rises and 
gradually changes to a second peak, giving ultimately a flat-top 
or even double-peaked wave with sharp zero. The intermediate 
positions represent what is called a saw-tooth wave. 

In Fig. 186 are shown the fundamental sine wave and the 


EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 


371 


complex waves produced by superposition of a quintuple har- 
monic of 20 per cent, the amplitude of the fundamental, under the 
relative phase displacement of 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, 180°, represented 
by the equations: 

sin /3 

sin iS - 0.2 sin 5 jS 

sin ^ - 0.2 sin (5 /S - 45°) 

sin /3 - 0.2 sin (5 ^S - 90°) 

sin 13 - 0.2 sin (5 /S - 135°) 

sin 13 - 0.2 sin (5 i3 - 180°). 


Fig. 187. — Some characteristic wave-shapes. 


The quintuple harmonic causes a flat-topped or even double- 
peaked wave with flat zero. With increasing phase displacement 
the wave becomes of the type called saw-tooth wave also. The 
flat zero rises and becomes a third peak, while of the two former 


372 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

peaks, one rises, the otlier decreases, and the wave gradually 
changes to a triple-peaked wave with one main peak, and a sharp 
zero. 

As seen, with the triple harmonic, flat top or double peak 
coincides with sharp zero, while the quintuple harmonic flat top 
or double peak coincides with flat zero. 

Sharp peak coincides with flat zero in the triple, with sharp 
zero in the quintuple harmonic. With the triple harmonic, the 
saw-tooth shape appearing in case of a phase difference between 
fundamental and harmonic is single, while with the quintuple 
harmonic it is double. 

Thus in general, from simple inspection of the wave-shape, 
the existence of these first harmonics can be discovered. Some 
characteristic shapes are shown in Fig. 187. 

Flat top with flat zero, 

sin i3 - 0.15 sin 3/3-0.10 sin 5 /3. 

Flat top with sharp zero, 

sin ^ - 0.225 sin (3 j8 - 180°) - 0.05 sin (5 /3 - 180°). 

Double peak, with sharp zero, 

sin /? - 0.15 sin (3 /? - 180°) - 0.10 sin 5 /3. 

Sharp peak with sharp zero, 

sin i8 - 0.15 sin 3 )3 - 0.10 sin (5 /3 - 180°). 

For further discussion of wave-shape distortion by harmonics 
see "Engineering Mathematics." 

252. Since the distortion of the wave-shape consists in the 
superposition of higher harmonics, that is, waves of higher fre- 
quency, the phenomena taking place in a circuit supplied by such 
a wave will be the combined effect of the different waves. 

Thus in a non-inductive circuit the current and the potential 
difference across the different parts of the circuit are of the same 
shape as the impressed e.m.f. If inductive reactance is inserted 
in series with a non-inductive circuit, the self-inductive reactance 
consumes more e.m.f. of the higher harmonics, since the reactance 
is proportional to the frequency, and thus the current and the 
e.m.f. in the non-inductive part of the circuit show the higher 
harmonics in a reduced amplitude. That is, self-inductive react- 
ance in series with a non-inductive circuit reduces the higher 
harmonics or smooths out the wave to a closer resemblance to 
sine-shape. Inversely, capacity in series to a non-inductive 
circuit consumes less e.m.f. at higher than at lower frequency, 
and thus makes the higher harmonics of current and of potential 


EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 373 

difference in the non-inductive part of the circuit more pro- 
nounced— intensifies the harmonics. 

Self-induction and capacity in series may cause an increase of 
voltage due to complete or partial resonance with higher har- 
monics, and a discrepancy between volt-amperes and watts, 
without corresponding phase displacement, as will be shown 
hereafter. 

253. In long-distance transmission over lines of noticeable 
inductive and condensive reactance, rise of voltage due to reso- 
nance may occur with higher harmonics, as waves of higher fre- 
quency, while the fundamental wave is usually of too low a 
frequency to cause resonance. 

An approximate estimate of the possible rise by resonance with 
various harmonics can be obtained by the investigation of a 
numerical example. Let in a long-distance line, fed by step-up 
transformers at 60 cycles. 

The resistance drop in the transformei'S at full-load = 1 per cent. 
The reactance voltage in the transformers at full-load = 5 per 

cent, with the fundamental wave. 
The resistance drop in the line at full-load = 10 per cent. 
The reactance voltage in the line at full-load = 20 per cent, with 

the fundamental wave. 
The capacity or charging current of the line = 20 per cent, of the 
full-load current, /, at the frequency of the fundamental. 

The line capacity may approximately be represented by a 
condenser shunted across the middle of the line. The e.m.f. at 
the generator terminals, E, is assumed as maintained constant. 

The e.m.f. consumed by the resistance of the circuit from 
generator terminals to condenser is 

Ir = OmE, 

or, 

■pi 

r = 0.06 J-- 

The reactance e.m.f. between generator terminals and con- 
denser is, for the fundamental frequency, 

Ix = 0.15E, 

or, 

jP 

X = 0.15 J-; 


374 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

thus the reactance corresponding to the frequency {2 k — 1)/ of 
the higher harmonic is 

x{2k- 1) = 0.15 (2 fc- 1) J- 

The capacity current at fundamental frequency is, 

i = 0.2 /; 

hence, at the frequency {2 k — 1)/, 


i = 0.2 (2 k - 1) e' ^' 


if 


e' = e.m.f. of the {2 k — l)th harmonic at the condenser, 
e = e.m.f. of the {2 k — l)th harmonic at the generator terminals. 
The e.m.f. at the condenser is 


e' = Ve' - i^r^ + *'^ (2 ^ - i; 
hence, substituted, 

e' 1 


e Vl - 0.059856(2 fc- 1)^ + 0.0009(2 fc - 1)' 

the rise of voltage by inductive and condensive reactance. 
Substituting, 


k = 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

or, 2k - 

- 1 = 1 

3 

5 

7 

9 

11 

and 

a = 1.03 

1.36 

3.76 

2.18 

0.70 

0.38 

That is, the fundamental will be increased at open circuit by 
3 per cent., the triple harmonic by 36 per cent., the quintuple 
harmonic by 276 per cent., the septuple harmonic by 118 per 
cent., while the still higher harmonics are reduced. 

The maximum possible rise will take place for 

that is, at a frequency / = 346, and a ^ 14.4. 

That is, complete resonance will appear at a frequency between 
quintuple and septuple harmonic, and would raise the voltage at 
this particular frequency 14.4-fold. 

If the voltage shall not exceed the impressed voltage by more 
than 100 per cent., even at coincidence of the maximum of the 
harmonic with the maximum of the fundamental. 


EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 375 

the triple harmonic must be less than 70 per cent, of the 

fundamental, 
the quintuple harmonic must be less than 26.5 per cent, of the 

fundamental, 
the septuple harmonic must be less than 46 per cent, of the 

fundamental. 

The voltage will not exceed twice the normal, even at a fre- 
quency of complete resonance with the higher harmonic, if none 
of the higher harmonics amounts to more than 7 per cent, of the 
fundamental. Herefrom it follows that the danger of resonance 
in high-potential lines is frequently overestimated, since the 
conditions assumed in this example are rather more severe than 
found in hnes of moderate length, the capacity current of such 
line very seldom reaching 20 per cent, of the main current, 

254. The power developed by a complex harmonic wave in a 
non-inductive circuit is the sum of the powers of the individual 
harmonics. Thus if upon a sine wave of alternating e.m.f. 
higher harmonic waves are superposed, the effective e.m.f. and 
the power produced by this wave in a given circuit or with a given 
effective current are increased. In consequence hereof alterna- 
tors and synchronous motors of iron-clad unitooth construction 
— that is, machines giving waves with pronounced higher 
harmonics — may give with the same number of turns on the 
armature, and the same magnetic flux per field-pole at the same 
frequency, a higher output than machines built to produce sine 
waves. 

255. This explains an apparent paradox: 

If in the three-phase star-connected generator with the mag- 
netic field constructed as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 188 
the magnetic flux per pole = 4>, the number of turns in series 
per circuit = n, the frequency = /, the e.m.f. between any 
two collector rings is 

E = \/2Trf2n^ 10-^ 

. since 2 n armature turns simultaneously interlink with the 
magnetic flux, <J>. 

The e.m.f. per armature circuit is 

e = \/2 7r/n«J>10-8; 

hence the e.m.f. between collector rings, as resultant of two 
e.m.fs., e, displaced by 60° from each other, is 

E = e\/3 = V2 7r/V3n$10-^ 


376 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

while the same e.m.f. was found from the number of turns, the 
magnetic flux, and the frequency by direct calculation to be 
equal to 2 e; that is, the two values found for the same e.m.f. 
have the proportion ■\/3:2 = 1 ; 1.154. 

This discrepancy is due to the existence of more pronounced 
higher harmonics in the wave e than in the wave E = e y. s/^, 
which have been neglected in the formula 

e = ^/2Trfn^lO-\ 

Hence it follows that, while the e.m.f. between two collector 
rings in the machine shown diagrammatically in Fig. 188 is only 


Fig. 188. — Three-phase star-connected alternator. 

e X V^) ^y massing the same number of turns in one slot 
instead of in two slots, we get the e.m.f. 2 e, or 15.4 per cent, 
higher e.m.f., that is, larger output. 

It follows herefrom that the distorted e.m.f. wave of a unitooth 
alternator is produced by lesser magnetic flux per pole — that is, 
in general, at a lesser hysteretic loss in the armature or at higher 


EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 377 

efficiency — than the same effective e.m.f. would be produced 
with the same number of armature turns if the magnetic dispo- 
sition were such as to produce a sine wave. 

256. Inversely, if such a distorted wave of e.m.f. is impressed 
upon a magnetic circuit, as, for instance, a transformer, the wave 
of magnetism in the primary will repeat in shape the wave of 
magnetism interlinked with the armature coils of the alternator, 
and consequently with a lesser maximum magnetic flux the 
same effective counter e.m.f. will be produced, that is, the same 
power converted in the transformer. Since the hysteretic loss 
in the transformer depends upon the maximum value of mag- 
netism, it follows that the hysteretic loss in a transformer is less 
with a distorted wave of a unitooth alternator than with a sine 
wave. 

257. From another side the same problem can be approached : 
If upon a transformer a sine wave of e.m.f. is impressed, the 
wave of magnetism will be a sine wave also. If now upon the 
sine wave of e.m.f. higher harmonics, as sine waves of triple, 
quintuple, etc., frequency are superposed in such a way that the 
corresponding higher harmonic sine waves of magnetism do not 
increase the maximum value of magnetism, or even lower it by a 
coincidence of their negative maxima with the positive maximum 
of the fundamental, in this case all the power represented by 
these higher harmonics of e.m.f. will be transformed without an 
increase of the hysteretic loss, or even with a decreased hysteretic 
loss. 

Obviously, if the maximum of the higher harmonic wave of 
magnetism coincides with the maximum of the fundamental, and 
thereby makes the wave of magnetism more pointed, the hyster- 
etic loss will be increased more than in proportion to the in- 
creased power transformed, i.e., the efficiency of the transformer 
will be low^ered. 

That is, some distorted waves of e.m.f. are transformed at a 
lesser, some at a larger, hysteretic loss than the sine wave, if the 
same effective e.m.f. is impressed upon the transformer. 

The unitooth alternator wave and the first wave in Fig. 226 
belong to the former class; the waves derived from continuous- 
current machines, tapped at two equidistant points of the 
armature, frequently, to the latter class. 

258. Regarding the loss of energy by Foucault or eddy currents, 
this loss is not affected by distortion of wave-shape, since the 


378 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

e.m.f. of eddy currents, like the generated e.m.f., is proportional 
to the secondary e.m.f.; and thus at constant impressed primary 
e.m.f. the power consumed by eddy currents bears a constant 
relation to the output of the secondary circuit, as obvious, since 
the division of power between the two secondary circuits— the 
eddy-current circuit and the useful or consumer circuit — is 
unaffected by wave-shape or intensity of magnetism. 

In high-potential lines, distorted waves whose maxima are 
very high above the effective values, as peaked waves, are 
objectionable by increasing the strain on the insulation. The 
striking-distance of an alternating voltage depends upon the 
maximum value, except at extremely high frequencies, such as 
oscillating discharges. In the latter, the very short duration of 
the voltage peak may reduce the disruptive strength, as dielectric 
disruption requires energy, that is, not only voltage, but time 
also.
