LECTURE I 

GENERAL 

A. RELATIVITY OF MOTION, LOCATION AND TIME 

The theory of relativity as developed by Einstein and his collaborators 
has revohdionized science by sweeping aside many of the limitations which 
hitherto fettered the human intellect. But, being essentially mathematical, 
a general conception of it can be given to the non-mathematician only by 
the use of analogies and illustrations, and this inevitably involves a certain 
looseness of argumentation. The following pages therefore may serve 
to give a general idea of the theory of relativity and its consequences, but 
not to revieiv it critically. 

The theory of relativity starts from two premises : 

1. All phenomena of space, time and motion are relative; 
that is, there is no absolute motion, etc., but motion, 
location and time have a meaning only relative to some 
other location, time, etc. 

2. The laws of nature are universal ; that is, they apply in 
the same form everywhere, whether in a speeding railway 
train on earth or in the empty space between the fixed stars. 

So far, these two premises appear simple and rather 
obvious, but startling and revolutionary ideas appear when 
carrying the reasoning from these premises to their ultimate 
conclusions, as Einstein has done. 

Suppose, for instance, you happen to run your car at 
30 miles per hour against a stone wall. There seems 
nothing relative about this. The wreck is very real; the 
stone wall does not budge, and when a rapidly moving mass 

1 


2 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

meets an immovable body mechanical energy is set free 
destructively. But is the stone wall really immovable? 
Is it not a part of the earth, which spins around its axis at 
800 miles per hour so that both the stone wall and your car 
were moving. And perhaps if you happened to drive the 
car in a westward direction — that is, against the rotation 
of the earth — your car really was moving more slowly than 
the stone wall — was going only 770 miles per hour, and 
the stone wall 800. But think further: Is not the stone 
wall, as a part of the earth, revolving around the sun at 
70,000 miles per hour, and is not the sun, and with it the 
earth, and the stone wall, and your car, also moving on an 
unknown path among the fixed stars? So that really you 
know nothing and can know nothing about the actual or 
absolute speed of the car. All you know is that the relative 
speed of the car^ — ^that is, the speed relative to the earth and 
thus to the stone wall — was 30 miles per hour. But that 
is sufficient to let you understand the effects of the car 
meeting the stone wall. 

So with location. The room in which you are sitting 
while reading appears fixed and definite. But the only way 
you can describe its location is by referring it to some other 
body or location as reference point, by saying, for instance, 
that your room is located x feet north and y feet west and 
z feet above the surveyor's markstone on City Hall Square. 
Or you can give its latitude, longitude and altitude, stating 
that from the starting point of latitude, longitude and 
altitude — -that is, where the equator meets the zero meridian 
at ocean level — you go so many degrees north (or south), 
then so many degrees west (or east) , and then so many feet 
up (or down), and thereby reach your room. Three 
distances thus are required, measured in three chosen 
directions, from a chosen starting point, to locate a point 
or an object in space, and therefore we say that space has 
three dimensions. But do these three distances really 
locate you in your room? Suppose somebody, reading 
the directions, should try to locate your room 1000 years 


RELATIVITY OF MOTION 3 

hence. He would not find it. Thus one more thing must 
be given — the time, measured from some arbitrary starting 
point, for instance, anno domini. Thus, you see, to locate 
anything in this world of ours requires four measurements, 
three distances and one time; and we thus can say that the 
world and its events have four dimensions, three dimensions 
of space and one of time. 

But all such location of events in the four-dimensional 
world can only be relative to the arbitrarily chosen reference 
points in space and time. In bygone ages, when people 
thought the earth flat and immovable as the center of the 
universe, they could dream of referring location to an 
absolute stationary reference point, say the Capitol of Rome. 
But when we learned that the earth is a sphere, spinning 
around its axis and revolving around the sun, the earth 
ceased to offer any fixed and permanent reference point in 
space. The sun then was chosen. But the astronomers 
found that the sun also is moving among the fixed stars. 
And the ''fixed" stars do not stand still, but are moving 
"every which way," so that all the attempts to find some- 
thing immovable and fixed in the universe have failed, 
and thus all motion, all location, can be relative only to 
other objects, which are also moving. 

B. EFFECT OF RELATIVE MOTION ON LENGTH 
AND TIME 

Suppose you toss a stone across your room. Observing 
the point at which the stone leaves your hand, the direction 
in which it leaves, and the speed, the physicists can calcu- 
late the path of the stone as it curves downward and finally 
comes to rest on the floor of the room. Suppose now you 
are on a railway train, moving at constant speed on a 
straight, level track, and toss a stone across the car in which 
you are riding. From the same three observations — the 
point in the moving railway car where the stone leaves your 
hand, the direction, and the speed relative to the carat which 


4 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

the stone leaves — the physicist by the same laws calculates 
the path which the tossed stone traverses in the car. 
Whether the car is moving at constant speed on a straight, 
level track or standing still makes no difference; the path 
of the stone is the same, as the same laws of nature apply 
everywhere. 

If the laws of nature are the same in the railway train 
moving at constant speed on straight, level track as 
they are on the "rigid" platform of the earth or in the 
empty space among the fixed stars, then the speed of light 
must also be the same, 186,000 miles per second, and so 
must be the speed with which the electric current travels 
in its circuit, which is the speed of light. This is important 
because all observations depend on it. Any event is either 
observed by seeing it or recorded by some electrical arrange- 
ment, and in either case we do not get the exact time when 
the event occurs but a time later by the time it takes the 
light to reach our eye or the electric current to flow from 
the event to the recording device, and to get the exact 
time of the event, we therefore have to allow for the time 
taken by the light or the electric current. Owing to the 
enormous speed of the light, this time difference between the 
moment when the event occurs and the moment when we 
observe or record it usually is so extremely small as to be 
negligible. But not always. For instance, when on ship- 
board out on the ocean the chronometer has stopped and 
the mariner tries to find the location of his ship from the 
stars, he might use the eclipses of the moons of Jupiter for 
this purpose. But when he sees the eclipse it has already 
passed by from 30 to 50 minutes — ^depending on the relative 
position of the earth and Jupiter — owing to the time which 
it takes the light to go from Jupiter to the earth over the 
hundreds of millions of miles of distance. 

But if the speed of hght in the moving train must be 
the same as on the stationary track, we get some rather 
strange conclusions. Suppose we place a lamp on the 
track, back of the receding train, so that the light shines 


RELATIVITY OF LOCATION AND TIME 5 

along the track (for instance, a signal light). The beam of 
light travels along the track at 186,000 miles per second. 
The train moves along the track, in the same direction, at 
100 feet per second. Therefore, relative to the train, we 
should expect the beam of light to travel at 186,000 miles 
less 100 feet per second. It would be thus with a rifle 
bullet. If I shoot a rifle along the track at the receding 
train, and the rifle bullet travels along the track at 2000 
feet per second, while the train travels in the same direction 
at 100 feet per second, then the rifle bullet will catch up 
with the train and pass through the train at the relative 
speed of 2000 less 100, or 1900, feet per second. But 
the constancy of the laws of nature teaches us that if the 
beam of light travels along the track at 186,000 miles per 
second, and the train in the same direction at 100 feet per 
second, the speed of the beam of light measured in the 
train (that is, its relative speed to the moving train) cannot 
be 186,000 miles less 100 feet, as we would expect, but must 
be 186,000 miles per second, the same as its relative speed 
to the track. Now, the only way we can explain this con- 
tradiction is to say that when we measured the speed of 
light on the train our measuring rods were shorter, or, 
using the length of the train as measure, the train was 
shorter, or the time was slower, or both. 

These three possibilities really are one. It can be shown 
that if the length of the train is shorter, the time must be 
slower in the same proportion. Thus this leads to the 
strange conclusions that, when the train is moving, to the 
beam of light coming from the outside, and to an outside 
observer, the length of the train has shortened and the time 
in the train has slowed down. But if we now stop the train 
and remeasure it, we find the same length and the same 
time as before. 

This conclusion from the two premises of the theory of 
relativity is so against our accustomed ideas that we would 
be inclined to reject it if it could not be verified by experi- 
ment, and the experiment has been made repeatedly. It is 


6 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

true a difference of 100 feet per second out of 186,000 miles 
per second is so extremely small that it could not be 
measured. But we can speed up the train and, instead 
of 100 feet per second, run it at 100,000 feet, or 20 miles, per 
second. We have such a train. The earth on its path 
around the sun moves about 20 miles per second, and the 
speed of light going with the motion of the earth then should 
be 20 miles less, going against the motion of the earth 20 miles 
greater. But the experiment shows that it is the same, 
and experiment has proven this with an accuracy many 
times greater than the difference in the speed of light 
which we should expect but do not find, so that the fact 
of the constancy of the speed of light is beyond question. 
Beyond question, then, also, is it that for an outside 
observer motion shortens the length and slows down the 
time on the moving body; but not for an observer moving 
with the train — for him length and time are the same. 

C. RELATIVITY OF LENGTH AND DURATION 

What does this mean? The train stands on the track. 
I measure it from the outside, you measure it from the 
inside, and we find the same length. We compare our 
watches and find them to go alike. Now the train starts 
and runs at high speed. While it is passing me I measure 
its length again and find it shorter than before, while at the 
same time, you, traveling with the train, measure it again 
from the inside and find the same length we both found 
when the train was standing still. But while passing over 
it you measure a piece of the track and find it shorter than I 
find it when measuring it from the outside. While you pass 
me on the train I compare your watch with mine and find 
your watch slower than mine. But, at the same time, you, 
comparing your watch with mine, while passing me, find my 
watch slower. Then the train stops, and both our measure- 
ments agree again. What then is the "true" length of the 
train and the *'true" time — that which I get when measur- 


RELATIVITY OF LOCATION AND TIME 7 

ing the train while it passes me at high speed or that which 
you get while moving with the train? Both, and neither. 
It means that length is not a fixed and invariable property 
of a body, but depends on the condition under which it is 
observed. The train has one length to the observer stand- 
ing still with regard to it, that is, the observer in the train; 
a different and a shorter length to the observer whom it 
passes at 100 feet per second; and if I could go outside of the 
earth and measure the length of the train, while the train 
and earth rush by me at 20 miles per second, I would find a 
third still shorter length. 

Length and time, therefore, are relative properties 
of things, depending on the conditions under which they are 
observed, particularly the relative speed of the body to the 
observer. This really is so startling only because it is 
novel, since at all speeds which we find around us, even the 
highest speeds of rifle bullets, the change of length and time 
is so extremely small as to be inappreciable, and we therefore 
are used to finding length and time constant. Appreciable 
changes occur only at the speed of 10,000 to 100,000 miles 
per second, while the most accurate methods of measure- 
ment would fail to show an appreciable shortening of the 
railway train going at 60 miles per hour, because the short- 
ening is so small. But it is there just the same. 

However, the relativity of the length of a body- — ^that is, 
the dependence of the length on the conditions of observa- 
tion—is no more strange than the relativity of the color of a 
body. Off-hand we will say that a body has a fixed and 
definite color; the grass is green, the snow is white. Never- 
theless, when we think of it we know it is not so. The lady 
buying material for a dress in the dry-goods store during the 
daytime may select a nice heliotrope. But when the dress 
is finished, in the ballroom, she finds its color a clear soft 
pink. And when, to have a photograph taken, she goes to 
a photographer using mercury lamps in his studio, she finds 
the dress a clear blue. Which is its "true" color? Helio- 
trope, or pink, or blue? Any of the three is the true color 


8 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

in the condition under which it is observed. So, Einstein's 
theory of relativity proves to us, it is with length and with 
time. There is no single length of a body, nor time on the 
body, but length and time are relative and vary with the 
conditions under which they are observed, with the relative 
speed of the observer, just as the color of a body varies with 
the kind of light under which it is seen. 

D. RELATIVITY OF MASS 

If, then, in a body moving rapidly past us, the distance 
appears shortened and the time slowed down, the speed, 
which is distance divided by time, must also appear slower. 
Now, the energy of the moving body depends on its mass 
and its speed, and with the same energy put into the body, 
if the speed appears slower, the mass must appear larger. 
We thus draw the conclusion from Einstein's theory of 
relativity that the mass of a moving body is not constant, 
but increases with the speed, and the oldest of the great 
fundamental laws of nature, the law of conservation of 
matter, thus goes into the discard. For nearly two cen- 
turies we have accepted the law of conservation of matter 
and believed that matter — that is, mass — can neither be 
created nor destroyed, and now we find that mass varies 
with the speed, so that speed- — that is, energy- — ^can create 
mass, and mass or matter probably is merely a manifesta- 
tion of energy. And this can be and has been verified 
experimentally. 

The decrease of length, the slowing down of time, the 
increase of mass, becomes appreciable only at velocities 
approaching that of the light. Thus at ordinary every- 
day velocities length, time and mass are constant; but in 
the vacuum tubes used in our big wireless stations to pro- 
duce electrical vibrations which carry the message through 
space across oceans and continents, or to receive the 
faint signal arriving from far-distant stations, the current is 
carried through the empty space of the tube by minute 


RELATIVITY OF LOCATION AND TIME 9 

particles, so-called electrons, and measuring the speed 
and the mass of these electrons, the physicists find that they 
move at speeds of 10,000 and 100,000 miles per second and 
that their mass is not constant, but increases with the speed, 
in the manner required by Einstein's theory. This was the 
first experimental proof of the change of mass, and it was 
found before Einstein gave the explanation in his relativity 
theory. 

E. ACCELERATION AND THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 

Suppose you have a billiard table in your house. You 
put a ball in the middle of the table. It stays there until 
something pushes it, and this something we call " force." Or 
you shoot a ball across the billiard table. It moves in a 
straight line until it strikes the boundary, rebounds and 
again moves in a straight line at constant speed. Suppose 
now we have a billiard table in a train, and the train is 
running at constant speed on a straight level track. You 
again put a ball in the middle of the table and it stays there, 
just as was the case in your house, at rest with regard to the 
table, though I, standing outside near the track, see that 
train and table and ball all three move together at constant 
speed. You shoot the ball across the table, and it moves in 
a straight line at constant speed, thus in the moving railway 
train obeying the same law of nature as in your stationary 
house, the law that any body keeps the same state, whether 
rest or motion, until something changes its state. 

But suppose the train is speeding up, its speed increasing 
while you put the ball in the middle of the billiard table in 
the train. Now you find that this ball does not remain 
at rest, but it begins to move toward the back of the train, 
first slowly and then more and more rapidly until it comes 
to rest against the back boundary of the table, just as a 
stone which I drop does not remain at rest, suspended in 
the air, but begins to move downward with increasing 
speed — -''falls." So the billiard ball in the speeding train 


10 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

"falls" toward the back of the train. You shoot a ball 
across the billiard table while the train is speeding up. It 
does not move in a straight line, but curves toward the 
back of the train, just as a thrown stone, on earth, does not 
move in a straight line at constant speed, but curves down- 
ward. You say then that in the speeding railway train 
some force acts on the billiard ball, pulling it toward the 
back of the train, just as the attraction of the earth pulls 
downward. You may speculate on this force which 
attracts things toward the back of the speeding railway 
train and find its laws just as Newton found the laws 
governing the force of gravitation. But I, standing on the 
embankment, near the track, while the speeding railway 
train passes, see that there is no real force acting on the 
billiard ball, but when you put it in the middle of the table, 
left to itself, it continues to move in a straight line at the 
speed which it and the train had when you put it there. 
What happens is that the billiard table and train, speeding 
up, slide forward under the ball, and the ball thus seems to 
fall backward toward the end of the train. So, when you 
shoot a ball across the billiard table in the speeding railway 
train, I from the outside see the ball move in a straight 
line at constant speed, but see billiard table and train slide 
forward under it, so giving you, who are moving with the 
speeding railway train, the impression of an attracting 
force pulling the ball toward the back of the train. You 
try to find the laws of this force; that is, the laws obeyed by 
the relative motion which you see. But to me these 
motions are those of a body left to itself, in a straight line 
at constant speed, and, knowing the motion of the speeding 
railway train, the mathematician can calculate the motion 
which you observe, without any physical assumption, 
merely as a mathematical transformation from the straight- 
line motion which I see from the outside to the complicated 
motion relative to the speeding train which you observe, 
and so derive the law of the latter motion — ^that is, the law 
of the fictitious attracting force — to which you ascribe 


RELATIVITY OF LOCATION AND TIME 11 

these motions. This Einstein has done, and so has derived 
a new and more general expression for the law of gravitation, 
in a way which does not depend on any hypothesis con- 
cerning the nature of the force. This law is more general 
than Newton's law of gravitation, and the latter appears 
as the first approximation of Einstein's law of gravitation. 

The more general law of gravitation given by Einstein 
does not mean that Newton's law of gravitation is wrong. 
Both laws give so nearly the same results in almost all 
cases, even in the calculation of cosmic motions, that usually 
the difference cannot be discovered even by the most 
accurate measurements. This is to say that Newton's 
law is a very close approximation of Einstein's. There are 
a few cases only in the universe as we know it today where 
the difference becomes noticeable. Such, for instance, is 
the motion of the planet Mercury. This planet has been 
observed for thousands of years, but all attempts to calcu- 
late its motion accurately by Newton's law have failed, 
while the application of Einstein's law has succeeded, thus 
once again corroborating his theory of relativity. 

To summarize the conclusions at which we have arrived, 
the theory of relativity means: 

All phenomena of motion, space and time are relative. 
The laws of nature, including the speed of light, are the 
same everywhere. 

From these principles it follows that length, time and 
mass are relative also, are not fixed properties of things, 
but vary with the relative speed of the observer. 

A more general law of gravitation is derived as a mathe- 
matical transformation of straight-line inertial motion to 
the apparent motion relative to a speeding system (the 
railway train in above illustration) and shows that gravi- 
tation is not a real force, but a manifestation of inertia, 
just as centrifugal force is.
