LECTURE IV 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 
A. THE GEOMETRY OF THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD 

The starting point of the relativity theory is that the 
laws of nature, including the velocity of light in empty 
space, are the same everywhere and with regard to any 
system to which they may be referred — whether on the 
revolving platform of the earth or in the speeding railway 
train or in the space between the fixed stars. From this it 
follows that the length of a body is not a fixed property of 
it, but is relative, depending on the conditions of obser- 
vation— the relative velocity of the observer with regard 
to the body. It also is shown that the laws of motion of 
bodies in a gravitational field are identical with the laws 
of inertial motion with regard to an accelerating system 
(as exemplified by the billiard ball in the speeding railway 
train, Lecture I). From these two conclusions it follows 
that in the gravitational field the circumference of a circle 
is not equal to tt times its diameter, as we have learned to 
prove in our school geometry, but it is less than w times the 
diameter. As the theorems of mathematics depend upon 
each other, a change in one theorem involves a change in 
others. Thus from the theorem which we found to apply 
in a gravitational field, that ''the circumference of the 
circle is less than t times the diameter, and this the more so 
the larger the diameter," it follows that the ''sum of the 
angles in a triangle is greater than 180 degrees, and this 
the more so the larger the sides of the triangle." It also 
follows that any two lines in a plane intersect each other, 

69 


70 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

that there exist no parallel lines, and that there exists no 
infinitely distant point on a straight line, but that all the 
points of a straight line are at finite distance and the total 
length of the straight line therefore is finite. Thus, going 
along a straight line in one direction, we come back to our 
starting point from the opposite direction, after going a 
finite distance — just as is the case in describing a circle. 
Just as the straight line is finite in length in this geometry 
of the gravitational field, so the plane is finite in area, though 
unlimited, that is, without boundary^ — like the surface of a 
sphere^ — and the volume of space is finite, though unlimited, 
and the conception of infinite distance or length or area or 
volume does not exist. By mathematical deduction from 
the relativity theory we thus derive the conclusion that our 
three-dimensional universe is not infinite, but finite, though 
inconceivably large. Although finite, it is limitless, just 
as the surface of a sphere is a two-dimensional space which 
is finite but limitless. 

We have always understood that mathematics is the 
most exact of all sciences and its theorems capable of abso- 
lute proof, and yet here in the gravitational field we find a 
space in which the proven theorems of our school geometry 
do not hold good any more. 

Mathematics is the most exact science, and its conclu- 
sions are capable of absolute proof. But this is so only 
because mathematics does not attempt to draw absolute 
conclusions. All mathematical conclusions are relative, 
conditional. It is not correct to say, ''The sum of the 
angles in a triangle is 180 degrees," but the correct state- 
ment of the mathematical theorem is: "If certain premises 
or assumptions (the 'axioms') are chosen as valid, then the 
sum of the angles in a triangle equals 180 degrees." But 
whether these premises or axioms are "true" — that is, 
whether they are in agreement with physical experience — 
or not is no part of mathematics. The only requirements 
are that the number of axioms be sufficiently large to build 
conclusions or "theorems" on them and that they be 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 71 

consistent with each other, that is, that one does not con- 
tradict the other. 

Thus we could well imagine the selection of another set 
of axioms, different from that of our school geometry, so as 
to lead to the theorem that ''the sum of the angles in the 
triangle is less than 180 degrees," or "is more than 180 
degrees," etc. 

Our school geometry is built on a set of axioms which 
was selected by Euclid 2000 years ago, and therefore it is 
often called Euclidean geometry. Undoubtedly, Euclid 
was led by experience when selecting the axioms which he 
chose, and therefore the theorems of Euclidean mathe- 
matics have been in good agreement with physical experi- 
ence. This, however, is no part of mathematics. It 
would be a problem of mathematical physics to determine 
which set of axioms gives closest agreement between physical 
space and the mathematical theorems, in other words, 
what are the mathematical characteristics of physical 
space. If, then, experience shows that under certain 
conditions (in a gravitational field or in a centrifugal 
field) the characteristics of physical space do not agree 
with the theorems of Euclidean mathematics, it merely 
means that the set of axioms on which Euclid based his 
geometry does not apply to this physical space, and a 
different set of axioms, leading to a different, non-Euclidean 
geometry, has to be selected. In the realm of pure mathe- 
matics there is nothing new in this. Nearly a hundred 
years ago the great mathematicians of the nineteenth 
century, the Germans Gauss and Riemann, the Russian 
Lobatschewsky, the Hungarian Bolyai and others, investi- 
gated the foundations of geometry, which led them to the 
development of systems different from the Euclidean and 
based on different sets of axioms. Therefore, when finally, 
in the relativity theory, physics advanced beyond the 
range of Euclidean geometry, the mathematics of the new 
space characteristics was already fully developed. 


72 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

B. EUCLIDEAN, ELLIPTIC, HYPERBOLIC AND 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 

Among the axioms of Euclidean geometry, such as: 
*'Two points determine a straight Une," "If two straight 
lines have two points in common, they have all points in 
common," "There are points outside of a straight line," 
*' There are points outside of a plane," etc., there is one 
axiom which appears less obvious, the so-called "parallel 
axiom." It is: 

"Through a point outside of a given straight line one, 
and only one, parallel line can be drawn" (the parallel line 
being defined as a line in the same plane which, no matter 
how far prolonged, never intersects the given line). 

The legitimacy of this axiom has always been doubted, 
and throughout all the centuries since Euclid numerous 
attempts have been made to "prove" this parallel law; 
that is, to show that it is not an axiom but a theorem, a 
conclusion from the other axioms. All these attempts 
failed, and finally the great mathematicians of the nine- 
teenth century attacked the problem from another side. 
Assuming that the parallel law is not an axiom, but a 
conclusion from other axioms, then we should be led to 
contradictions by choosing a different parallel law- — -for 
instance, assuming that there exist no parallels or that more 
than one parallel exists- — and developing the conclusions 
from this new assumption. On the other hand, if the par- 
allel law is a real axiom, then by assuming a different paral- 
lel law and developing the conclusions from it, we should 
get just as consistent a system of geometry as Euclid did, 
but one different from the Euclidean. 

Such systems were derived from the assumption stated, 
thus proving that the parallel law is a real axiom and not a 
conclusion from other axioms. In addition to the Euclid- 
ean geometry, which is based on the axiom of one parallel, 
a complete geometry (called the "hyperbolic geometry") 
was developed on the axiom that there exist more than one 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 73 

parallel, and a complete geometry (the ''elliptic geometry") 
on the axiom that no parallel exists. The latter is the 
geometry shown by the relativity theory to apply in a 
gravitational field; the former applies in a centrifugal field. 
Furthermore, by leaving out the parallel axiom altogether 
and using only the remaining axioms of Euclid, a consistent 
geometry was developed, the ''geometry of position" (Geo- 
metrie der Lage) or "projective geometry," which is more 
general than the hyperbolic, elliptic and Euclidean geom- 
etries and includes these three as special cases. It deals 
exclusively with the relative positions of points, lines, fig- 
ures, etc., but not with size and measurement. Obviously 
it must do thus, since it must simultaneously fit all three 
conditions: C = ird, > 7r(iand<7rd. 

In the following tabulation I give some of the main char- 
acteristics of the four geometries:^ 

When the mathematicians of the nineteenth century 
had shown that Euclid's geometry is not the only possible 
one, but that two other geometries existed, the elliptic and 
the hyperbolic, fully as consistent as Euclid's, the question 
arose which of the three geometries completely represents 
the space of physical nature. 

The exact measurement of the angles in a triangle would 
determine this. If the physical space is non-Euclidean, the 
sum of the angles of the triangle would differ from 180 
degrees, the more the larger the triangle. But there may 
be a slight departure of our space from Euclidean, which 
escapes notice, as the size of the triangle which we can meas- 
ure is limited to a few hundred million miles. ^ The mathe- 
maticians therefore used to speculate whether such a 
departure would be discovered if we could measure a tri- 
angle between some distant fixed stars with some hundred 
light-years as sides. 

The answer has now been given indirectly by the rela- 
tivity theory, showing that physical space varies between 

^ Some of these properties will be explained later on. 
^ The diameter of the orbit of the earth. 


74 


RELATIVITY AND SPACE 


General 

Euclidean 

Elliptic 

Hyperbolic 

geometry of 

or 

or 

or pseudo- 

position, or 

parabolic 

spherical 

spherical 

projective 
geometry 

Physical exist- 

Fieldless space. 

Gravitational 

Centrifugal field. 

General. 

ence. 

field. 

Characteristic 

of space .iC. 

Zero. 

Positive. 

Negative. 

None. 

Parallel axiom 

Through a point 

Any two straight 

Through a point 

The conception of 

of plane ge- 

outside of a 

lines in a plane 

outside of a 

infinity does not 

ometry. 

straight line 

intersect each 

straight line two 

exist, therefore 

one, and only 

other at finite 

straight lines 

also not the con- 

one, parallel line 

distance; that 

can be drawn 

ception of paral- 

can be drawn. 

is, parallels do 
not exist. 

which intersect 
the given 
straight line at 
infinite distance, 
and between 
these two lines 
exist an infinite 
number of 
straight lines 
through the 
point which do 
not intersect the 
given line at all. 

lels. 

Triangles 

The sum of the 

The sum of the 

The sum of the 

Comparison of 

angles in a tri- 

angles in a tri- 

angles in a tri- 

size, and meas- 

angle equals ISO 

angle is greater 

angle is less 

ure m e n t does 

degrees. 

than 180 de- 

than 180 de- 

not exist, and 

grees, the more 

grees, the more 

metric relations 

so, the larger 

so, the larger 

do not enter this 

the sides of the 

the sides of the 

geometry. 

triangle. 

triangle. 

Circles 

The circumfer- 

The circumfer- 

The circumfer- 

Metric relations 

ence of a circle 

ence of a circle 

ence of a circle 

do not exist. 

equals ir times 

is less than tt 

is more than ir 

The circle does 

the diameter. 

times the diam- 

times the diam- 

not exist as a 

eter, the more 

eter, the more 

distinct figure. 

so the larger the 

so the larger the 

but merely the 

diameter. 

diameter. 

general conic or 
curve of second 
order. 

Lines 

The straight line 

The straight line 
is finite in 

The straight line 
is infinite in 

is infinite in 

length and un- 

length, but un- 

length and un- 

limited. It has 

limited. It has 

limited. It has 

one infinitely 

no infinitely 

two infinitely 

distant point. 

distant point. 

distant points. 

Planes 

The plane is in- 

The plane is fi- 

The plane is in- 

finite in area 

nite in area, but 

finite in area 

and unbounded. 

unbounded. 

and unbounded. 

The conception 
of infinity does 

Space 

Space is infinite 
in volume and 

Space is finite in 
volume, but un- 

Space is infinite 
in volume and 

not exist. 

unlimited. 

limited. 

unlimited. 

Visual concep- 

Space visually 

Space visually 

Space visually 

tion. 

appears infinite 

appears infinite. 

appears finite. 

and is infinite. 

though it is 
finite. 

though it is in- 
finite. 

2-d i mensional 

Plane (cylinder. 

Sphere (spin-die, 

Pseudo-sphere. 

('(|uivalcnt. 

cone, etc.). 

etc.). 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 75 

Euclidean at great distance from masses and elliptic space 
at masses, and that the average space characteristic thus 
is not zero, but has a slight positive value, is elliptic. 

It is curious that in speculating on the possible departure 
of space from Euclidean, in the last century, we expected to 
find it slightly hyperbolic. Why, I cannot remember. 

C. THE EARTH AS ELLIPTIC 2-SPACE 

Living in our physical space, which as far as our sense 
perceptions extend is Euclidean or zero-space, we cannot 
get outside of it to see how the world would look in an 
elliptic or hyperbolic space, and it therefore is difficult to 
get a conception of the two non-Euclidean forms of space, 
the positive or elliptic and the negative or hyperbolic. The 
only way in which we can get a partial conception is by 
analogy with two-dimensional spaces, or 2-spaces. We can 
produce the two-dimensional analogy of the two non- 
Euclidean spaces as surfaces, and, as three-dimensional 
beings, looking at these two-dimensional spaces from the 
outside, from a higher dimension we can see and compare 
their properties and characteristics with those of the 
Euclidean 2-space, that is, the plane. 

To illustrate: Suppose our earth were surrounded by a 
dense mass of clouds through which sun and moon could 
never be seen — about as it seems to be on the planet Venus. 
There would then be nothing to draw our attention to the 
earth being a sphere floating in three-dimensional space, 
and our world would practically be two-dimensional, lim- 
ited to the surface of the earth. The third dimension, the 
vertical, is accessible to us to a very limited extent only, 
so that we might forget it and for the moment think our- 
selves two-dimensional beings, limited to the surface of the 
earth. There would be no evidence to show us that the 
earth is not a flat plane. Indeed, in spite of all the evidence 
given by our view of the universe around it, by the sun and 
moon and stars and their motion, it took man many thou- 


76 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

sand years to come to the conclusion that the earth is 
round. 

On such an earth, cut off by clouds from any view of the 
universe, a Euclid might develop a geometry and would 
produce the same axioms and theorems as we have learned 
in school in plane geometry. That is, the straight line 
would still be defined in the same way, as the shortest dis- 
tance between two points, the sum of the angles in the 
triangle would be proven as 180 degrees, etc. Suppose now 
with the passing of time commerce extended on earth and 
ships traveled long distances. This would enable us to 
measure large triangles, for instance, that between New 
York, Rio de Janeiro and Liverpool. We would find that 
the sum of the angles of such a large triangle is not 180 
degrees, as Euclid proved, but is materially larger. All 
the places lying 1000 miles from New York City we would 
find lying on a circle with 2000 miles diameter. But when 
measuring we would find the circumference of this circle 
materially shorter than r times 2000 miles. If we prolong 
a straight line on this two-dimensional surface of the earth, 
it does not extend into infinity, as Euclid claims, but has 
a finite length of 25,000 miles (the circumference of the 
earth), and then returns into itself. The surface of the 
earth is not infinite, as is that of the Euclidean plane, but 
is finite, though it has no limit. ^ If we prolong two paral- 
lel lines, we find that they approach nearer and nearer 
together and finally, after 6250 miles, intersect each other. 

1 When the relativity theory leads to the conclusion that the extent of 
our universe is not infinite, but that the volume of the universe is finite, 
most people will ask, "What is beyond the finite extent of the universe?" 
and find it difficult to conceive that there is no "beyond," but that the 
universe, though finite, has no limits, or, in other words, that a finite volume 
can be all the universe. Just as for ages it was difficult for man to conceive 
that the earth on which we live should not be infinite, but finite in area 
and still have no limit or "edge," and kept asking for an "edge" of the world. 
We got over this by familiarity and have no difficulty to conceive a surface 
like that of the earth, which is finite in area but without boundary. Anal- 
ogous thereto is the universe of the relativity theory — finite in volume, but 
without limit or boundary. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 11 

In short, we find that the geometry on the surface of the 
earth is not the Euclidean geometry, but is the elliptic 
geometry of the mathematicians of the nineteenth century, 
the same which the relativity theory shows to apply in the 
gravitational field. When measuring the surface of the 
earth, we therefore cannot use the Euclidean geometry 
and the trigonometry corresponding thereto, the plane 
trigonometry of our school days, except on a small scale, 
as when surveying the lots of a city. When surveying 
countries and continents, we have to use the trigonometric 
formulas of the elliptic geometry, in which the sum of the 
angles of the triangle is greater than 180 degrees. 

Thus the non-Euclidean geometry which the relativity 
theory introduced into physics, after all, is nothing so very 
new. A part of the plane or two-dimensional elliptic 
geometry, its trigonometry, is in every day use in sur- 
veying the earth and is quite familiar. We all had it in 
school under the name of ''spherical trigonometry." 
Spherical trigonometry thus is the trigonometry of the 
eUiptic plane geometry. However, when studying spherical 
trigonometry, we usually take advantage of our being 
three-dimensional beings, and so do not limit ourselves to 
the surface of the sphere, but project outside of it into the 
third dimension. Naturally, in three-dimensional geom- 
etry we could not do this, as we have no fourth dimension 
beyond it. But, rigidly, we could develop the spherical 
trigonometry, and the geometry of the spherical surface, 
perfectly well without ever going outside of the surface into 
a higher or third dimension. So we have to do in three- 
dimensional geometry, where we have no higher dimension 
to go to. After all, we apply the same looseness of usage 
in plane geometry, for instance, when proving two figures 
as congruent by bringing them to coincidence. Sometimes 
we can do this by moving the one figure in the plane into 
coincidence with the other, but sometimes we cannot do 
this without turning the one figure over in the third dimen- 
sion— when two figures are symmetrical like the impres- 


78 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

sions of the right and the left hand. But, strictly, this is not 
permissible in plane geometry, and we should distinguish 
between congruent alike and symmetrical. In solid geom- 
etry we have to do so. A right-handed and a left-handed 
screw may be identical in every part, but still are not alike, 
as they cannot be brought into coincidence, because we 
cannot turn one over through a fourth dimension.^ 

The plane or two-dimensional elliptic geometry, therefore, 
is the geometry in the surface of a sphere, while the plane 
or two-dimensional Euclidean geometry is the geometry in 
a plane, and the plane or two-dimensional hyperbolic geom- 
etry is the geometry in a so-called pseudo-spherical surface. 
(Fig. 24.) 

This is rather disappointing. We were led to a new non- 
Euclidean geometry, in which the straight line has only a 
finite length, the plane a finite area, the angles of the tri- 
angles are more than 180 degrees, and other strange features 
exist, and then find that this is merely the geometry of the 
surface of a sphere, and the straight line of finite length is 
merely a largest circle, etc. 

We spoke of a straight line on the earth, and large tri- 
angles, like that between New York, Liverpool and Rio de 
Janeiro, in which the sum of the angles is greater than 180 
degrees. But you will say that the path in which a ship 
travels from New York to Liverpool is not a straight line, 
but is a circle, a ''largest circle" of the earth, and the straight 
line between New York and Liverpool passes through the 
interior of the earth. The straight line between New York 
and Liverpool, which goes through the interior of the earth, 
is not a part of the earth's surface, but belongs to a higher 
dimensional space. What, then, is the straight line of the 
earth's surface? A straight line has been defined physically 
as the shortest distance between two points. In the two- 

1 Thus, if a magician or spiritist claims the existence of a fovu'th dimension, 
ask him to prove it by taking a right-handed glove from some one in the 
audience and returning it as a left-handed glove. He would have to turn 
it over in the fourth dimension. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 79 

dimensional geometry of the earth's surface the shortest 
distance between two points is the largest circle, and this 
therefore is the straight line of the spherical surface. Or, 
a straight line has been defined as the path of a body mov- 
ing without any force acting on it. Such a body in a 
spherical surface moves in the largest circle. The mathe- 
matical definition of the straight line is 'Hhe line deter- 
mined by two points." This probably is the best definition. 
Analytically it means that the straight line is the line 
defined by an equation of the first degree. In the two- 
dimensional elliptic space which we call a spherical surface 
the largest circle therefore is the straight line and as seen 
fulfills all the characteristics of the straight line, and 
within the spherical surface the largest circle has no curva- 
ture ; that is, it is the same as our straight line in three- 
dimensional space is to us. Nevertheless, looking at the 
"straight line" of the spherical surface from the outside, 
from higher space, we see it curved, and therefore the 
mathematicians often use the term ''the straightest line." 
But in this respect it is in no way different from the straight 
line of our three-dimensional space which we get, as the 
shortest distance, by stretching a string between two points. 
We do not know whether what we call a straight line in 
our three-dimensional space would still be a straight line 
in a four-dimensional space of which our three-dimensional 
space was a part (and mathematically we can conceive 
such a space). Or, rather, when we speak of a straight 
line in our three-dimensional space, because it is determined 
by two points and is the shortest distance between these 
two points, we know that this line, from a four-dimensional 
Euclidean space of which our space is a part, is not always 
straight, is not always the shortest distance between two 
points, but may be curved, just as the straight line of the 
spherical 2-space is curved seen from 3-space. For 
instance, when the earth and the planet Mars are nearly at 
opposite sides of the sun, the straight line between the 
earth and Mars, which passes close to the sun, is straight 


80 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

only in our space, but as a line in a Euclidean 4-space, 
which contains our 3-space, it is curved^ and another line 
is a shorter distance between earth and Mars, but this 
other line passes out of our 3-space into 4-space and there- 
fore does not exist for us. As seen then, the ''straight 
line" has a meaning only with reference to the space in 
which it is defined, but a straight line of one space may not 
be a straight line for a higher space. 

Furthermore, while from and as a part of Euclidean 
3-space, the elliptic 2-space appears curved, as a sphere, if 
we could look at it as a part of an elliptic 3-space of 
the same characteristic constant as the elliptic 2-space, the 
latter would not appear curved, as sphere, but flat, and the 
straight line of this elliptic 2-space would not appear curved, 
as circle, but straight. But an Euclidean plane and a 
straight line in it, as a part of elliptic 3-space, would 
appear curved (or as much of the plane or line as can be 
obtained in elliptic 3-space). Broadly then, any space, 
straight line or plane seen from and as part of a higher 
space of different characteristic appears curved, and it 
appears plane or straight only as part of a higher space of 
the same characteristic constant, as will be seen later. 

D. THE CHARACTERISTIC OR CURVATURE OF SPACE 

There is only one physical space for us, the space in 
which we are living, which is practically a Euclidean 
3-space. We cannot go beyond this space, and therefore 
find it difficult to get a conception of the two non-Euclidean 
spaces, the elliptic and the hyperbolic, as we cannot look 
at them from the outside and see their characteristics and 
properties. The only way to get a partial conception of 
these non-Euclidean spaces is by analogy with the corre- 
sponding two-dimensional spaces, that is, surfaces. Just as 
the plane is the 2-space corresponding to our physical 

* Because it passes through the gravitational field of the sun, that is, a 
region of elliptic 3-space. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 81 

3-space, and as in school we first studied the geometry of 
the 2-space, or plane geometry, and then advanced to the 
geometry of the 3-space, or solid geometry, so we can 
construct and produce the elliptic and the hyperbolic 
2-space, which correspond to the elliptic and hyperbolic 
3-space in the same way as the Euclidean plane corresponds 
to the Euclidean or physical 3-space. 

These Euclidean, elhptic and hyperbolic 2-spaces we can, 
as three-dimensional beings, see from the outside and so 
get a complete conception of their characteristics and of 
the elliptic and hyperbolic plane geometry which corre- 
sponds to the Euclidean plane geometry. 

It is characteristic of the three types of 2-space or surface 
that the circumference of the circle is equal, larger or smaller 
than T times the diameter. That is, the quantity C jl-rr 
(where C is the circumference of a circle with radius r) 
equals one in Euclidean space, is less than one in elliptic 
and more than one in hyperbolic space. Thus the quantity 

1 - C/27rr (1) 

equals zero in Euclidean space, is positive in elliptic and 
negative in hyperbolic space, and therefore to a certain 
extent characterizes the space. However, as the circum- 
ference of the circle differs from li^r the more the larger the 
diameter, the quantity (1) is not constant, but depends on 
the radius r. It can be shown, however, that the quantity^ 


- - K^ - 2^) 


(2) 


is independent of the numerical value of the radius r and is 
constant for each kind of space. It therefore is called the 
characteristic constant of the space, or sometimes, for reasons 
which we will see later, the curvature of the space. 

In Euclidean space the characteristic constant K is zero, 
and the Euclidean space therefore also is called zero space, 
or plane space, or parabolic space. 

1 In this expression higher terms have been neglected, and it therefore 
is an approximation only, which holds when (1 — C/2irr) is a small quantity. 
6 


82 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

In elliptic space the characteristic constant K is positive, 
and the larger the more the elliptic space differs from Eucli- 
dean. Elliptic space therefore may also be called positive 
space; that is, space with positive constant. 

In hyperbolic space the characteristic constant K is 
negative, and the larger the more the hyperbolic space 
differs from Euclidean. Hyperbolic space, therefore, may 
also be called negative space; that is, space with negative 
constant. 

Let a straight line be drawn through two points of the 
curve shown in Fig. 18 and these two points be brought 


Fig. 18. Fig. 19. 

infinitely near together. The line then becomes the 
tangent T of the curve and represents the direction of the 
curve at the point p where it touches. 

Let now a circle be drawn through three points of the 
curve and these three points be brought infinitely near 
together. The circle then osculates the curve, as seen in 
Fig. 19- — that is, touches it at three successive points — and 
therefore has at these points the same curvature as the 
curve. That is, it represents the curvature of the curve at 
its contact point p, and the radius R of this circle is the 
radius of curvature of the curve, and its reciprocal. 

/vi = 1/R, (3) 

is called the curvature of the curve. (The reciprocal of the 
radius is called the curvature, as a curve is called the more 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 83 

curved the smaller its radius. Radius R = co gives zero 
curvature or the straight line.) 

When we come to surfaces, that is, two-dimensional 
spaces, we find that we have at every point of the surface an 
infinite number of tangents, in different directions, which 
all lie in a tangent plane. We also find that in every point 
we have an infinite number of osculating circles and there- 
fore radii of curvatures, which all lie in the normal to the 
surface at the point. Among this infinite number of 
radii are two radii at right angles to each other, Ri and 
R2, which are extremes, either one the shortest and the 
other the longest or both the shortest, but in opposite 
directions. The curvature of the surface at the point is 
measured by the product of the two main radii of curva- 
ture, and as the curvature of the surface is denoted the value: 

A% = I/R1R2. (4) 

It can be shown that the characteristic constant (2) of 
the 2-space, K, is equal to Ko (4) ; that is, is the curvature of 
the 2-space. That is: 

V " 2Tj)^RJf.^R'' ^^^ 

is the characteristic constant of the 2-space or the curvature 
of the surface which represents this 2-space. 

Instead of speaking of the characteristic constant of the 
space, we therefore often speak of the "curvature of space.'^ 

The Euclidean space thus is a space of zero curvature. 

The elliptic space is a space of positive curvature. 

The hyperbolic space is a space of negative curvature. 

Characteristic of all three spaces is constancy of 
curvature. 

R = VR1R2 = -^ (6) 

then may be called the radius of the space. 
In elliptic space, 

I = 27rR (7) 


7 


84 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

is the length of the straight line. 

A = 4x7^2 (8) 

is the area or surface of the plane. 

V = 4.ir'R'/S ' (9) 

is the volume of the 3-space. 

In Euclidean space, K = 0, thus R = co ] that is, the 
radius of the Euclidean space is infinity. 

In the hyperbolic space K is negative, and R thus 
becomes imaginary; that is, the radius of the hyperbolic 
space is imaginary. 

Elliptic 2-space, therefore, is a surface having constant 
curvature of radius R; that is, it is a sphere, and the 
elliptic geometry is the geometry on a sphere of radius 

R = l/VK. (10) 

m 

In Euclidean 3-space the equation of a 2-space of con- 
stant curvature K is given by 

;, |,. + ,. + (,_ _l.y 1 = 1. („) 

For K = 0 this gives : 

z = 0; (12) 

that is, the xy plane, or a Euclidean 2-space. 

For K differing from zero, shifting the coordinate center 
by l/^K gives: 

K {x' + y' + 2^) = 1. (13) 

For positive value of K this is a sphere of radius : 

R = l/VK. (14) 

For negative value of K, 

K = -l/R\ 
it is: 

x2 H- ^2 _^ ^2 - -R^; 

that is, all points x, y, z are imaginary. 

Thus in Euclidean 3-space no real (complete) hyperbolic 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 


85 


2-space exists, but the hyperbolic 2-space appears as a 
sphere with imaginary radius: 

R = j/VK. (15) 


Fig. 20. 


E. THE STRAIGHT LINE AND THE ELLIPTIC 2-SPACE 

In a surface or 2-space, as a plane, a line may be bent to 
the right, as a in Fig. 20, or to the left, as z. We can imag- 
ine the line gradually changed from a to b, c, etc., to z. 
In a it is bent to the right, in z to the 
left, and when changing from a to s it 
therefore must sometime pass through 
a position s, where it is not bent to 
the right any more, nor yet bent to 
the left — that is, where it is straight ; 
in other words, where it has no bend 
in the 2-space or as line or element 
of the 2-space and hence is a straight 
line of the 2-space, whatever the 
2-space may be, whether a zero- 
space, that is, a Euclidean plane, or an elliptic 2-space, 
which seen from our Euclidean 3-space appears as a sphere 
etc. This straight line may be bent into a direction at 
right angles to the 2-space, out of the 2-space into a third 
dimension, for instance into the Euclidean 3-space (our 
physical space), from which we see the 2-space, and then 
would appear as a circle. Or it may appear straight even 
from the 3-space, this depending on whether the character- 
istic of the 3-space is the same or different from that of the 
2-space. 

I may have a straight line L in an elliptic 2-space S, 
which is contained in our Euclidean 3-space (that is, a 
largest circle L on sphere S in Euclidean 3-space). I can 
put a Euclidean 2-space — that is, a Euclidean plane P— 
through the line L. For the elliptic 2-space >S, L is a straight 
line. For the Euclidean 2-space P, L is a circle. I may 
put another elliptic 2-space S\ of lesser characteristic 


86 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

constant^ — ^that is, a sphere of larger radius — through 
L. On S\ L will be curved, but less than on P. (But I 
could not put an elliptic 2-space of greater curvature 
through L; that is, seen from Euclidean 3-space, put 
through a circle a sphere of smaller radius than that of the 
circle, so that the circle lies on the sphere.) 

The elliptic 2-space S, as part of the Euclidean 3-space, 
appears curved, as sphere. But I could, at least mathe- 
matically, consider S as an elliptic 2-space contained in an 
elliptic 3-space of the same constant, and seen from this 
elliptic 3-space, S would not be curved, but would appear 
plane, as a flat plane, of finite area. The elliptic 2-space 
S would then be in common to the Euclidean 3-space 
and the eUiptic 3-space, and in the Euclidean 3-space S 
would be a sphere, but in the elliptic 3-space S would 
be a flat plane of finite area. Any straight line on S 
would also be a straight line for the elliptic 3-space, but 
would be a circle for the Euclidean 3-space, a "largest 
circle" of the sphere S. I may consider S as contained 
in an elliptic 3-space of lesser curvature than that of S. 
In this 3-space S would still appear curved, but less so than 
it appears in the Euclidean 3-space; that is, it would 
appear as a sphere of larger radius. But we could not 
consider the elliptic 2-space *S as a part of an elliptic 
3-space of greater curvature than S. If we could con- 
sider the elliptic 2-space >S as a part of an elliptic 3-space 
of greater curvature than that of ^S, S would again appear 
curved, but not as sphere, but now with hyperbolic or 
negative curvature, and that would make it an imaginary 
sphere, as we have seen above. S could not as a whole be 
contained in the elhptic 3-space of greater curvature. 
The reason is that the straight lines in the 3-space are 
finite in length and shorter than the straight lines on the 
2-space S, when the latter has a lesser curvature, and the 
latter therefore cannot be contained in the 3-space. Thus 
only a distorted part of S could find room in the 3-space, 
as pseudo-sphere. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 87 

In other words, a 2-space can be contained in a 3-space of 
lesser curvature, but not in a 3-space of greater curvature. 
Thus a hyperbohc 3-space can contain eUiptic 2-spaces and 
EucUdean 2-spaces and hyperbohc 2-spaces of lesser 
negative curvature; a Euclidean 3-space can contain 
only Euclidean and elliptic 2-spaces, but no complete 
hyperbolic 2-space, and an elliptic 3-space can contain 
only elliptic 2-spaces of the same or greater curvature, the 
former appearing as planes, the latter as spheres. 

It thus follows that, absolutely, there exists no such thing 
as a ''straight line," but "straight line" is relative only, 
with reference to the space in which it is defined. Any 
straight line with regard to a space of higher dimension 
than the space in which it is a straight line may not be a 
straight line; it is a straight line if the higher space has the 
same curvature, but is curved in a higher space of different 
curvature. 

This is exactly the case in our physical space, which as 
the relativity theory shows, has a slight positive curvature. 
If we could imagine our three-dimensional space as con- 
tained in and as a part of a four-dimensional Euclidean 
space (and mathematically there is no difficulty in this), 
then from this four-dimensional Euclidean space we would 
see that the straight lines of our space are really circles 
with about 100,000,000 light-years' radius. But the center 
of the circle and its curvature are outside of our 3-space, 
in the fourth dimension, exactly as the straight line of the 
elliptic 2-space is a circle seen from the Euclidean 3-space 
containing the elliptic 2-space as sphere, but a circle of 
which the center and the curvature are outside of the 2- 
space, and within the 2-space it has no curvature. 

Thus, also, what we see as a plane in our space, from the 
four-dimensional Euclidean space in which our space is 
contained, would be seen as a sphere with 100,000,000 light- 
years' radius, and our entire three-dimensional space would 
be a three-dimensional hypersurface, finite but unlimited, 
in the Euclidean 4-space. But while we mathematically 


88 


RELATIVITY AND SPACE 


can conceive of such a "hyper surface," physically we 
cannot. 


F. BENDING OF SPACE 

Suppose in a Euclidean 2-space — that is, a plane like the 
sheet of paper on which is printed Fig. 21 — we have two 
points, Pi and P^. Through these two points we can put 
one, and only one, straight line, Lq. This is the shortest 
distance between the two points Pi and Po, and any other 
line between them, as Li or L2 — shown dotted in Fig. 21 — 


Fig. 21. 

is longer. Suppose we have a straight line L in the plane 
Fig. 21 and a point P outside of L. Any line drawn in the 
plane through point P, as Li, Lo, L3, etc. (shown dotted), 
intersects the line L, except one line Lo, which no matter 
how far it is produced does not intersect L and is called the 
parallel. From this it follows that in a triangle ABC the 
sum of the angles equals 180 degrees, and that in any circle 
the circumference C is tt times the diameter DOE of the 
circle. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 89 

Suppose now we take the plane of Fig. 21- — -the sheet of 
paper — and bend it in any desired manner, but without 
stretching it. We may bend it into a cylinder or a cornu- 
copia—that is, a cone — ^or into a corrugated sheet as shown 
in Fig. 22.1 Looking at it now, from outside space, the 
lines L, Lo, Li, the sides of the triangle ABC, etc., are not 
straight any more, but curved. But within the plane of 
the paper the dimensions all remain the same, and if we 
measure the sides of the triangle or the circumference of the 
circle, the angles, areas, etc., with a rule or measure con- 
tained within the plane of the paper (that is, within the 
2-space, the rule therefore in the 3-space bending with the 
paper) , we then find exactly the same measurements as before 
we bent the plane into a cylinder or corrugated shape. The 
lineLo, though not appearing straight anymore from the out- 
side, still is, within the sheet of paper, shorter than the lines 
Li and L2 and still is the shortest path between the points 
Pi and Pi — that is, still is the ''straight line" of the 2- 
space- — ^and Lo still never intersects L — ^that is, remains the 
parallel. Thus all the geometry which we derived and 
proved in the Euclidean plane (Fig. 21) still holds just 
the same in a cylinder, a cone, a corrugated sheet or any 
other 2-space which we may produce by bending this 
Euclidean plane, and there is no way and no possibility to 
show and prove from the inside of the 2-space (Figs. 21 and 
22) whether we have bent it out of shape or not. Indeed, 
there is no such thing as bending the 2-space per se 
out of shape, but we have bent it only with regard to its 
location with respect to the 3-space from which we look 
at it. 

The same thing applies to an elliptic or hyperbolic 2- 
space. We may take a piece of a sphere (Fig. 23 or 27) and 
bend it — always without stretching — into a spindle, as in 

* This figure and some of the following ones are printed stereoscopically, 
so that the reader may take them out and look at them through a stereo- 
scope to see the curvature. With a little practice it is possible to see 
stereoscopically without a stereoscope. 


90 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

Fig. 28. All dimensions measured within the surface have 
remained the same, and a two-dimensional being living 
within the surface could never find out whether he was in 
the surface of a sphere, or of a spindle, or of some other 
shape produced by bending. The straight lines of the 
sphere — that is, seen from the outside, its largest circles — 
also are the straight lines of the spindle — that is, the short- 
est lines between two points; the angles are the same, etc. 
Thus the characteristic constant, or the curvature of the 
space, remains unchanged by the bending of the space. 

Euclidean 2-space thus is the plane and any surface 
made by bending it or a part of it in any desired manner — • 
into cylinder, cone, wave surface, etc; elliptic 2-space is the 
sphere and any surface made by bending a piece of the 
sphere into some other shape, as a spindle; hyperbolic 
2-space is the pseudo-sphere — ^not existing in Euclidean 
3-space — or any surface which can be considered as made 
by bending a piece of the pseudo-sphere into some other 
shape as shown in Fig. 24. 

But it must be bending without stretching. If, for 
instance, in bending the plane Fig. 21 I stretch it at some 
places, contract it at others, the line Lq between P1P2 of 
Fig. 21 may be stretched and so may become longer than 
lines Li or L2, and therefore will cease to be the shortest 
line — that is, the straight line of the bent space^ — ^and the 
geometry of this space would not remain the same. 

This illustrates the relativity of the conception ''straight 
line." The shortest path between two points Pi and P2 
of the cylinder or cone looks very different to us from a 
straight line, and still it is geometrically identical with the 
straight line of our plane geometry; and it becomes like it in 
looks on simply um-olling the cone or cylinder — an opera- 
tion which makes no change whatever within the surface, 
but merely changes its relation to a higher dimensional 
space. 

However, when we bend a 2-spacc into some other shape 
we may get ''kinks" or "singular points" into it, and at 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 91 

these singular points conditions may become indefinite; 
and in the geometry on a surface with such singular points 
we have to take care to arrange our figures so that they keep 
away from the singular points. For instance, w^e can bend 
a plane into a cone, and the geometry on the cone therefore 
is identical with the plane geometry of our school days, but 
when drawing figures on the cone — ^straight lines like the 
lines traced by a string stretched on the cone — we must keep 
away from the point of the cone. So the geometry on the 
spindle is the geometry on the sphere, but while on the 
sphere we may draw the figures anyw-here, on the spindle 
we have to keep the lines of the figure away from the two 
points of the spindle, as singular points. 

This possibility of bending a space into some other form 
without change of its constant permits us to illustrate 
hyperbolic geometry on a real surface. As has been seen, 
a complete hyperbolic 2-space cannot exist in Euclidean 
3-space. But in Fig. 24 is shown a picture of a hyperbolic 
2-space which bears to the complete hyperbolic 2-space 
about the same relation as the cone in Euclidean 2-space 
bears to the plane. It is Beltrami's pseudo-sphere, the 
rotation surface of the tractrix^ as meridian curve. 

As seen, Beltrami's pseudo-sphere has a singular point at 
infinity- — that is, the surface points into infinity in two 
opposite directions (the lower side is cut shorter in the 
model) — and a singular line, a circular knife edge. Taking 
the precaution to draw the figures on the pseudo-sphere so 
that they do not run into the singular line and the singular 
point, we can study the hyperbolic geometry on it. 

1 The tractrix is the curve described by a weight at one end of a rod 
when the other end of the rod is dragged along a straight line. That is, 
it is the curve given by the condition, that tlie length of the tangent of the 
curve is constant. Its equation is: 

, , fc + V/c- - a;2 ,- 

y = k log V fC^ — x^ 


92 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

G. MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND PHYSICAL SPACE 

We must sharply distinguish between physical space and 
mathematical space. Mathematical space is the concep- 
tion of a dimensional continuous manifold, and an infinite 
number of different mathematical spaces, of any number of 
dimensions, can be conceived and have the same reality 
in the science of mathematics as philosophical conceptions. 
Physical space is the form of conception in which our mind 
clothes the (supposed) extraneous cause of our sense per- 
ceptions. There is therefore only one physical space, and 
it exists only as a form of something acting on our senses ; 
that is, exists only as far as there is something filling space, 
and ''empty space" in this respect has no meaning. As 
physical space is a dimensional continuous manifold, it is 
of interest thus to ask which of the innumerable con- 
ceivable mathematical spaces agrees best with the proper- 
ties of physical space. Mathematical space itself has 
nothing to do with nature and things in nature, but is 
entirely conceptional. 

The only characteristic required and assumed for the 
"point" as the element of mathematical space is the 
property of continuity. That is, to any point you can 
get other points infinitely close and can thus go con- 
tinuously from one point to another. Such is for instance, 
the case with the instances of time, with the temperatures, 
colors, etc. 

The "straight line" then is defined by the axiom: 

"Two points a and b determine one and only one straight 
line L." 

The straight line contains an infinite number of points, 
which are given by: 

p, ^ ^^. (1) 

Each point pi is determined by a ratio x -f- y, and this 
ratio is called its coordinate. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 93 

We extend beyond the straight line by the axiom: 
''There are points outside of the straight line." 
Any such point c with any point pi of the line L gives 
again a line, and any point on this line is given by : 

^ x'c + tj'yi ^ xa -\- yb + zc . . 

^' x' + y' x + y + z' ^^^ 

The ratios x ^ y -^ z, then, are called the coordinates of 
the point p^- The infinite number of points pi of the first 
straight line L give an infinite number of straight lines, and 
as each of these straight lines has an infinite number of 
points p2, the number of points p^ thus is infinitely larger 
than that of the points pi. The totality of the points po, 
therefore, is called a two-dimensional manifold, or a mathe- 
matical 2-space, or a mathematical plane. 

We extend beyond the plane by the axiom: 

"There are points outside of the plane." 

Any such point d with any of the 0° ^ points p^ gives oo 2 
lines, and each of these lines contains an infinite number of 
points ps, given by: 

_ x"d + y"p2 ^ xa + yh -{- zc + ud ,^. 

P'- x" -f- y" xTT-f-2 + u ^^ 

so that infinite times as many points pz exist as points p2, 
and the points pz thus constitute a three-dimensional mani- 
fold or mathematical 3-space. Each of these points pz 
is given by its coordinates, the three ratios : x ^ y -^ z -^ u. 

Mathematically, we extend in the same manner beyond 
the 3-space by the axiom: 

"There are points outside of the 3-space."^ 

Any such point e again gives a straight line with any of 
the 00 3 points, and so leads to 0° ^ points, 

xa -\- yh -\- cz -[- ud -\- ve ,.. 

P4 = r — I 1 1 ' (4) 

x-{-y-\-z + u-\'V 

given by the coordinates x^y-^z-iru^v and constitut- 
ing a four-dimensional manifold or mathematical 4-space. 

' This axiom disagrees with physical experience, therefore all the mathe- 
matical spaces from here on have no physical representation. 


94 


RELATIVITY AND SPACE 


In this manner we can build up to any number of dimen- 
sions, and as a mathematical conception the n-dimensional 
manifold, or n-space, is just as real as the 3-space or 2-space. 
The mathematical n-space merely is the continuous mani- 


FiG. 25. 


fold of oo« elements which are given by the n ratios: x : y : 
z : u . . . Xn as coordinates. 

As the physical space is a three-dimensional manifold of 
physical points^ — that is, positions in space — ^it could be 
represented by some mathematical 3-space, while the 
surface of a physical body could be represented by some 
mathematical 2-space, etc. 

As in these mathematical spaces we have defined points, 
lines and planes, etc., we can deal with triangles, polygons, 
space figures, etc., and so can construct a geometry of 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 95 

mathematical 2-space, or plane geometry, a geometry of 
mathematical 3-space, or solid geometry, of mathematical 
n-space, etc. These geometries, however, would be entirely 
geometries of position, or projective geometries (the case 
4 of page 74) ; that is, they would deal only with the location 
of points and lines, etc., to each other, but not with the 
sizes and metric relations, with equality, etc. Thus, they 
contain theorems like Fig. 25. 

''If the three lines connecting corresponding corners of 
two triangles meet in one point, the three points of inter- 
section of corresponding sides lie in a straight line." 

But we could not have a theorem reading : 

"Two triangles are congruent if their corresponding sides 
are equal," 
or: 

''The sum of the squares of the two sides of a right-angled 
triangle equals the square of the hypotenuse." 

All metric relations, comparison of sizes, measurements, 
etc., are based on bringing figures into coincidence, for 
instance, the measuring rod with the measured length, etc. 
We prove the congruence of two triangles by moving one 
into coincidence with the other. Before this is possible 
in the mathematical spaces defined above we must add an 
axiom specifying that: 

"A figure can be moved in space without changing." 
This is by no means obvious. It is the case, for instance, 
in the surface of a sphere, but it is not the case in the surface 
of an egg-shaped figure. We can thus have a theorem of 
two congruent triangles in the sphere and prove it by 
moving the one triangle into coincidence with the other. 
But we could not have two congruent triangles in the sur- 
face of an egg, because we could not move one triangle 
from a part of the egg's surface to another one, where the 
curvature is different, without distorting it, stretching 
some dimensions and contracting others, and thereby 
changing the dimensions. Thus measurements on the 


96 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

surface of the egg and theorems on metric relations, as the 
Phythagorean theorem, are impossible. 

It is not possible to move figures from one space to 
another space of different curvature, for instance, from a 
sphere into a plane, without stretching and thereby chang- 
ing and distorting the dimensional relations. Thus figures 
in one space cannot be represented in correct dimension in 
another space. (Hence the difficulty in map making: to 
represent a part of the earth's surface, of a sphere, on a 
plane map with the least possible distortion of dimensions.) 

This axiom of metric relations expressed mathematically 
means that the characteristic or curvature of space K is 
constant. 

Thus, not all spaces are metric spaces^ — that is, spaces 
in which measurements are possible and in which we can 
speak of and compare the sizes of figures, deal with 
equality, congruence, infinity, etc. The general space is 
projective — that is, merely positional relations exist in it — 
and a special condition or axiom is required, that of con- 
stancy of curvature, to establish metric relations. 

Positionally, there is no difference between finite and 
infinitely distant elements of space, and the geometry of 
position, or projective geometry, thus does not contain the 
conception of the infinitely distant. The distinctions 
based on the relation to the infinitely distant — for instance, 
the differences between the ellipsis, which is all finite, and 
the hyperbola, which runs into infinity — are thus absent in 
it. This does not mean that infinitely distant elements 
may not exist in the geometry of position and that all the 
elements of projective geometry are finite (as all the ele- 
ments of the elliptic geometry are finite). But it means 
that in their projective properties infinitely distant ele- 
ments differ in no way from finite elements. All the differ- 
ence between finite and infinitely distant elements is metric, 
and the conception of infinitely distant elements as differ- 
ent from finite elements is introduced only by the metric 
axioms. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 97 

While mathematical spaces may be conceived as of any 
number of dimensions and have equal reality as mathe- 
matical conceptions, physical space is limited by experience 
to three dimensions- — that is, any point in physical space is 
determined by three data or coordinates, for instance, the 
three distances x, y, z from some arbitrarily chosen coor- 
dinate axes. 

It must be realized, however, that the three-dimensional 
character of physical space is in reality not entirely 
empirical, but also is conceptional. Physical space is three- 
dimensional when considering the point as the element of 
physical space; that is, any point in physical space is 
determined by three coordinates, x, y, z. But in the real 
physical space of our experience there are no points, but 
bodies, and the point is a mere mathematical conception, 
an abstraction, but not a physically existing thing. Thus 
the three-dimensional physical point-space also is a mere 
abstraction and is no more a physical reality than its 
element, the mathematical point, is. What is real is the 
physical body. But the location of a (rigid) body in 
physical space is not fixed by three coordinates, but requires 
six coordinates. Three coordinates, Xi, yi, Zi, would 
fix one point. Pi, of the body, for instance, its center of 
mass. This would not fix the body, for the body could 
still have an infinite number of positions in turning around 
its center point. Pi. We must thus fix a second point, P2. 
With point Pi fixed, P2 can move anywhere on the surface 
of a sphere with Pi as center and P1P2 as radius. As the 
surface of the sphere is two-dimensional, two data or 
coordinates, X2, ^2, thus are necessary to fix point P2 on this 
sphere. Fixing the two points Pi andP2, however, does not 
yet locate the body ; it still can turn around the axis P1P2. A 
third point, P3, thus has still to be fixed. As P3 could move 
on a circle around P1P2 as axis, one coordinate, X3, is sufficient 
to fix point P3 and thereby locate the body in space. 

Thus six data or coordinates, Xi, yi, Zi, Xo, yo, X3, are 
required to locate the position of the rigid body in physical 


xi, yi, zi, 

S12' = 

xi, 2/2, Z'l, 

Sis" — 

Xz, 2/3, Zz, 

S23" = 

98 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

space, and as empirically the body is the element of physical 
space, we might speak of the physical space of our experi- 
ence as six-dimensional and not three-dimensional. 

This is not a mere quibbling, but is very real, and all 
through physics and mechanics we find that not three but 
six data or coordinates are required to locate an element in 
physical space, whether a position, a motion or the cause of 
a motion, that is, a force. Thus : 

The location of a body in space is given by six coordi- 
nates, as above shown, or by nine coordinates, those of 
three points of the body, with three equations between them 
(which represent the constancy of the distances between 
the points) : 

(xi — X2)- + (2/1 — 2/2)^ + (zi — z^y. 

(xi - XzY -\- {ijx — yzY + {zi — ZzY. 
{x, -xzy + (2/2 - yzY + {Z2 - ZzY. 

The motion of a body from one position in physical space 
to another position is given by six independent components, 
of which for convenience three are usually chosen as 
translations, in the direction of the coordinate axes: 

Vi, Vo, Vs, 

and the other three as rotations around the coordinate axes : 

Ti, To, Vs. 

The total force acting upon a body is expressed by six 
independent components, of which usually three are chosen 
as vector forces along the coordinate axes: 

Fi, Fo, F3, 
and the other three as couples or torques around the axes: 

Tr, T„ T3. 
As in physical and mechanical calculations we almost 
always have to come to the abstraction of the ''point" as 
an element of our calculation, it is more convenient to con- 
sider the mathematical point as space element and treat the 
six coordinates of the physical body not as dimensions but 
as ''degrees of freedom." We must realize, however, that 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 99 

the statement of the three dimensions of physical space is 
not direct experience but already includes a mathematical 
abstraction. 

Thus by choosing something else than the mathematical 
point as space element we can consider physical space as of 
a different number of dimensions. 

For instance, any point in physical space can be con- 
sidered as center of an infinite number of spheres, of differ- 
ent radii r. As there are oo ^ points in space, given by their 
coordinates x, y, z, and each as center gives rise to oo spheres, 
given by their radii r, there are therefore existing in our 
physical space » ^ spheres, represented by their coordinates 
X, y, z, r. That is, with the sphere as element, physical 
space is four-dimensional, and a four-dimensional geometry 
— at least a projective or non-metric geometry — ^can be 
constructed in physical space with the sphere as element or 
''point." This has been done.^ 

Following our outline as above: 

Let Si, S2, S3, S4, Ss be five spheres in space. Then any 
of the CO 4 spheres is given by : 

with four coordinates, the four ratios: 

Xi "T" X2 "^ X^ ~v X4 ~r' Xq 

Three linear equations between the x then give a ''line," 
just as two equations in the three Cartesian coordinates 
give a line in three-dimensional point space. This "line" 
in 4-space consists of all the spheres which intersect in a 
circle, etc. 

As has been seen, therefore, in spite of all our conviction 
of the three-dimensionality of space, in reality space and 
the number of dimensions of space are relative, dependent 
on the condition of the observer^ — that is, on the thing 
chosen as element of the space^ — and physical space with 
the point as element may be three-dimensional. With the 
sphere as element it is four-dimensional, with the rigid 

1 Reye, "Geometrie der Kugelii." 


100 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

body as element six-dimensional. Thus space and time 
^,nd dimension are relative.^ 

H. THE BUNDLE AS ELLIPTIC 2-SPACE 

We try to get a conception of non-Euclidean space, as 
the elliptic space of the gravitational field and the hyper- 
bolic space of the centrifugal field, by considering the 
corresponding two-dimensional spaces. These we can 
construct as surfaces in our physical 3-space, and so can 
study them, by looking at them from a higher dimension as 
part of our 3-space, The disadvantage, however, is that 
we can look at these various 2-spaces from one 3-space 
only, our physical space, which is essentially Euclidean, and 
then it is difficult to abstract and realize which of the 
properties and characteristics of the 2-space are inherent 
in the 2-space and which are merely incidental to the 
relation of the 2-space with our particular 3-space and 
would not be the same when seen from some other 3-space, 
and therefore are not essentially characteristic of the 2- 
space. Thus we have seen that the elliptic 2-space, or 
''elliptic plane," appears from our Euclidean 3-space as a 
spherical surface, and the straight line of the elliptic 
2-space appears as a circle in the Euclidean 3-space ; that is, 
as curved. We realize that this line has no curvature, is 
straight, in the elliptic 2-space. But still, it is curved into 
the Euclidean 3-space, and as we look at it from the 
Euclidean 3-space, it is difficult to avoid the feeling that, 
after all, it is not a straight line but a curve, and only 
appears straight in the elliptic 2-space because from this 
space we cannot see the curvature. The same applies to 

1 The fallacy of the magician's or spiritist's four-dimensional space is 
not in the conception of a four-dimensional space in general, but in the 
conception of a four-dimensional 'point space — in claiming a dimension 
higher than shown by experience. Physical space is a three-dimensional 
point space, and attributing to it a higher dimension with the point as space 
element, therefore, is against experience. But not so with something 
else as element. On the contrary, with something else chosen as ele- 
ment of physical space, we may expect to find it with a different number 
of dimensions. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 101 

the elliptic 2-space as a whole; from within we can notice 
no curvature, and it is an elliptic plane, but from Euclidean 
3-space we plainly see it curved, as sphere, and so cannot 
entirely avoid the feeling that after all it is not plane but is 
curved, and that it appears plane from within merely 
because from within we cannot see the curvature. We 
may explain that from an elliptic 3-space of the same 
curvature the elliptic 2-space would not appear curved 
but as a plane of finite area; but as we cannot look at it 
from an elliptic 3-space, this is not entirely convincing — ■ 
the less so as it has to some extent become customary to 
speak of the characteristic constant of the space as its 
"curvature," because of its appearance from a Euclidean 
higher space. In reality this is incorrect, as the elliptic 
2-space and the lines in it are not curved inherently and 
their appearance to us as sphere and as circle is merely the 
appearance of their relation to the Euclidean 3-space from 
which we view them. As already brought out, the same 
2-space and its lines would appear differently curved from a 
different 3-space, and would not appear curved from a 
3-space of the same characteristic constant as that of the 
2-space. Unfortunately we have no such elliptic 3-space. 
However, the idea can be grasped by viewing an elliptic 
2-space under conditions where we do not have a 
Euclidean 3-space from which to look at the 2-space, but 
where we view the elliptic 2-space by itself, in comparison 
with a Euclidean 2-space. We see then that there is noth- 
ing curved about the former any more than about the 
latter. 

Mathematical space is a dimensional continuous mani- 
fold. The elements of it, while we may call them points, 
have nothing to do with the physical point^ — ^that is, the 
position in physical space — but may be any continuously 
changeable quantity, for instance, color, composition of a 
gas mixture, forces in physical space. ^ Physical space is a 

1 Thus for instance, all the forces in physical space form a six-dimen- 
sional manifold. 


102 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

three-dimensional manifold with the point^ — ^that is, the 
location in space^ — as element, and therefore when com- 
paring it with mathematical space we generally choose the 
point as the element of mathematical space. This, how- 
ever, is not essential, and we could just as well conceive of 
a mathematical space with the line as element or the plane 
as element, etc. This is commonly done in projective 
geometry, and it leads to valuable results. 

Suppose, then, we have a Euclidean plane or 2-space of 
zero characteristic E; that is, the two-dimensional manifold 
of points p and lines L contained in the plane E. From a 
point 0 outside of E we can project E. Every point p of 
E then is projected by a line through 0 (usually called a 
"ray"). I = Op, and every line L of £' is projected from 
0 by a plane P = OL. To the points p of E thus corre- 
spond the lines or rays I through 0, and to the lines L of 
E correspond the planes P through 0. All these lines I 
and planes P through 0 thus form a two-dimensional con- 
tinuous manifold- — that is, a 2-space — which corresponds 
element for element to the points and lines p and L of the 
Euclidean 2-space E. 

Such a 2-space, consisting of all the lines and planes 
through the point 0, is called a "bundle." Every figure 
consisting of points and lines in the Euclidean plane E is 
projected by and gives a figure consisting of lines and 
planes in the bundle 0 ; every angle between two lines in 
E is projected by an angle between the two corresponding 
planes in 0; every triangle in E is projected by a triside in 
0, that is, a three-sided pyramid; every curve in £' by a 
cone in 0, etc., and to the geometry of the plane E thus 
corresponds a geometry of the bundle 0, by projection. 
We can directly read off the theorems of the geometry of 
the bundle 0 from the theorems of the geometry of the 
plane E by saying, in the bundle, "line" or "ray" for 
"point" in the plane, and saying in the bundle 0 "plane" 
for "line" in plane E. Thus, for instance, the theorem of 
plane geometry of Fig. 25: 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 103 

"If the three lines connecting corresponding corners of 
two triangles meet in one point, the three points of inter- 
section of corresponding sides lie in a straight line," 
would be in the geometry of the bundle: 

"If the three planes connecting corresponding edges of 
two trisides intersect in a line, the three lines of intersection 
of corresponding side planes lie in a plane." 

The latter is derived from the former by projecting it 
from point 0. 

Two congruent triangles in E are projected by two tri- 
sides in 0, but these two trisides are not congruent. Two 
congruent trisides in 0 (that is, two trisides of which the 
one can be moved into coincidence with the other) give 
two triangles in E, but these two triangles are not congru- 
ent. Thus, while all the theorems dealing with the relative 
position of the elements- — points and lines in E, lines and 
planes in 0- — remain the same in the two 2-spaces, the 
Euclidean plane E and the bundle 0, the theorems dealing 
with metric relations, such as congruent, equal, etc., do not 
transfer. That is, the geometry which E and 0 have in 
common is the geometry of position, or projective geometry 
(column 4 on page 74), but not the metric geometry. In 
other words, the characteristic constant of the 2-space 0 is 
different from that of the plane E. 

"Length" or "distance" we call the part of the line 
between two points. To the line L oi E corresponds the 
plane P projecting the line L from 0, and to the two points 
J) I and p2 on the line L in E correspond two lines ^i and U 
in the plane P (the lines projecting the two points from 0). 
To the distance, as the part jpipi of the line L in E, thus 
corresponds in 0 the part of the plane P between the lines 
liU] that is, the angle ^1^2. Thus "distance" or "length" 
in our new 2-space, the bundle 0, is the angle between the 
two lines or rays, which are the "points" or elements of 
the 2-space 0. 

The length of the straight line L in the Euclidean plane 
E is infinite. That is, starting from a point p of this line L 


104 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

and moving along this line in one direction, I have to go into 
infinity and then come back from infinity on the other side 
of the line before I again reach point p. If in the ''line" 
of the bundle 0 — that is, the plane P which corresponds to 
the line L of E — I start from a "point"- — that is, the ray or 
line I corresponding to the point p of E — and follow the 
motion of p along line L, the corresponding ray I moves 
through the plane P; that is, turns around the point 0. 
But while the point p on L in the plane E traverses an 
infinite distance before it returns, the corresponding ray I 
on P in 0 returns after one complete revolution; that is, 
after traversing the angle 27r, Since the "length" in our 
2-space 0 is measured by the angle, it thus follows that the 
"length" of the straight line P in the 2-space 0 is 27r. 
In other words, the length of the straight line in 2-space 0 
is finite, and this 2-space, the bundle, thus is an elliptic 
2-space. 

The length of a straight line in an elliptic 2-space is 2TrR, 
where R is the "radius" of the 2-space, and is given by the 
characteristic constant K = 1/R^. As in the bundle 0 the 
length of the straight line is 27r, it follows that in this 
bundle it is i^ = 1; thus K = 1. That is, the bundle 0 is 
an elliptic 2-space of characteristic constant or curvature 1. 

An area in E, like that of a triangle, is projected from 0 
by a spherical angle. ' ' Area " or " volume ' ' in the 2-space 0 
thus is measured as a spherical angle. The total area of E 
is projected by the total spherical angle at 0. But while 
the area of E is infinite, the total spherical angle of 0 — 
that is, the total area or "volume" of the 2-space — is 
finite. 

Every angle between two lines LiLo in E is projected by 
an angle between the two planes Pi and Po, which corre- 
spond to the lines Li and Lo. The angle between the planes 
of the bundle 0 differs from the angle between the lines 
of the plane E, to which it corresponds. It is larger if the 
perpendicular form 0 on to E falls inside of the angle, 
smaller if the perpendicular falls outside of the angle. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 105 

Every triangle in E is projected by a triside in 0 — that 
is, a three-sided pyramid, which is the ''triangle" of the 
2-space called the bundle. If the triside and the corre- 
sponding triangle are situated so that the perpendicular 
from 0 onE falls inside of the triside, then each angle of the 
triside is larger than the corresponding angle of the triangle, 
as seen above, and as the sum of the angles in the triangle 
in E equals 180 degrees, the sum of the angles in the triside 
is thus larger than 180 degrees. If the triside is situated 
so that the perpendicular from 0 on E falls outside of the 
triside, the bundle 0 and with it the triside can be turned so 
that the perpendicular falls inside of it. (The correspond- 
ing triangle obviously then has changed in shape and posi- 
tion on E, but the sum of its angles is still 180 degrees.) 
Thus in any triside the sum of the angles is greater than 180 
degrees, and the bundle thus is an elliptic 2-space. 

A curve in the Euclidean plane E gives a cone in the 
bundle 0, and inversely. Suppose we have a circle in the 
2-space 0; that is, a circular cone. We may move it so 
that its center line is perpendicular to E. It then will 
project on £" by a circle, and if C is the circumference, r 
the radius of the circular cone (both in angular measure, as 
''length" in 2-space 0 is measured as angle), then from the 
relation between the circular cone and its projecting circle 
it follows: 

C = 2t sin r, 

and as sin r always is less than r, it is : 

C<27rr, 

and the circumference of the circle is less than tt times the 
diameter, the more so the larger the circle. 

The largest circle which can exist in the 2-space 0 has the 
radius 7r/2, or diameter x, and its circumference is 27r. It is 
the straight line of the 2-space 0. The straight line of the 
elliptic 2-space 0 thus can be considered as a circle with 
radius ir/2, just as the straight line of the Euclidean 2-space 
can be considered as a circle with radius 0° . 


106 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

Thus we have here, by projection from a Euclidean plane 
E, produced an elliptic 2-space of unit curvature, in the 
bundle 0, by using the ray — that is, the line- — -as element 
instead of the point, and thus have a chance to study 
the characteristics of the elliptic 2-space on the bundle 0, 
with the advantage that now we do not look at it from a 
higher space of different characteristic constant, but from 
an entirely unrelated space; that is, a space of different 
elements. We see now that in this 2-space 0, while it is 
elliptic, of characteristic constant or ''curvature" 1, there is 
nothing curved about it. Its straight line is the plane P. 
It has a finite length 27r, but there is nothing curved about 
P, and we see thus that while the elliptic 2-space in the 
Euclidean 3-space appears curved, as sphere, and the 
straight lines in it appear curved, as circles, this is not a 
feature of the elliptic 2-space, but of its relation to the 
Euclidean 3-space, since when unrelated to an Euclidean 
3-space there is nothing curved in the elliptic 2-space, as 
the bundle 0. 

In the Euclidean plane E we have parallels. But two 
parallels of E project from 0 by two planes as ''lines" of 
the bundle, which intersect in a line or ray — that is, a 
"point" of 0 — and this is just as finite and real as any 
other. Any two planes of 0 intersect; thus there are no 
parallels in 0. The infinitely distant points of E project 
from 0 by rays, which are parallel to the plane E, but in 0 
are just like any other rays, are finite. Thus there is no 
infinity in the elliptic 2-space 0. 

The elliptic 2-space 0 is finite; the length of any straight 
line in it is 2t; its total volume or area is 47r. And still 
there is nothing outside or beyond it in 2-space, but it is all 
the space, and so shows how a finite volume — -or "area" 
in 2-space, here measured by the spherical angle from 0 — 
can fill all the space. 

In many respects this elliptic 2-space, derived by using 
the line or "ray" as element instead of the point, is more 
convenient and illustrative than the point space on the 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 107 

spherical surface for realizing the characteristics of elliptic 
space. 

I. PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 

By eliminating the metric axioms we limit the general 
geometry, or projective geometry, to mere relations of 
position, but exclude all theorems dealing with equality, 
congruence, proportionality and similarity, with numerical 
relations and measurement, with parallels and the effect 
of infinitely distant elements, as the distinction between 
ellipsis, hyperbola, circle and parabola, etc. It might be 
thought that very little is left then for consideration, and a 
few theorems of the general or projective geometry may 
therefore be given to illustrate the wide and interesting field 
of geometrical research outside of the metric axioms. 

Theorems of geometry of position, or projective geom- 
etry, which hold on the sphere and pseudo-sphere, and in 
the bundle as well as in the Euclidean plane, are : 

1 . If the three lines connecting corresponding corners of 
two triangles meet in a point, then the three points of 
intersection of corresponding sides of these two triangles lie 
on a straight line. 

This theorem is shown in Fig. 25 on a Euclidean plane, in 
Fig. 26 on corrugation as Euclidean 2-space, in Fig. 27 on a 
sphere, and in Fig. 28 on a spindle as elliptic 2-space. We 
have mentioned it already in the bundle as elliptic 2-space 
with a different element. 

2. In a plane (Fig. 29) are given two lines, Li andLa, and 
three points, po, pi, p^, outside of these two lines. From the 
point Po lines are drawn intersecting the lines Li and L2 in 
the respective points ai and a2, &i and 62, Ci and C2, etc. 
Then the points of intersection, a of the lines piai and p2a2, 
b of pihi and pobo, c of piCi and P2C2, etc., lie on a conic sec- 
tion. On this conic also lie the points pi and p^, the point 
of intersection q of the lines Li and L2 with each other, and 
the points of intersection Si of the line Li with pop2 and S2 
of L2 with popi. 


108 


RELATIVITY AND SPACE 


It is interesting to note that the conic is an element of 
projective geometry, defined as a curve of second order; 
that is, by the feature that a straight fine can intersect it in 
a maximum of two points. The classifications of the conic, 
however, are no part of projective geometry, as they are 


Fig. 29. 

made by its relation to infinity and therefore are metric in 
character : The hyperbola has two infinitely distant points, 
the parabola has one infinitely distant point, the ellipsis 
has no infinitely distant point; that is, its two infinitely 
distant points are imaginary, and the circle is the ellipsis 
in which the two imaginary infinitely distant points are at 
right angles to each other. This classification of conies 
applies only in the Euclidean plane, but not on the sphere 
or in the bundle, as in the elliptic space there is no infinity. 
3. If from a point p (Fig. 30) two lines are drawn inter- 
secting a conic (as, for instance, a circle) in the points ai 
and a2 and 6i and 62 respectively, and the points of inter- 
section, p' of aihi and 0062 and p" of ^162 and a-^bi, are con- 
nected by a straight line P, and pi and p2 are the points of 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 


109 


intersection of this line P with the conic, then ppi and pp2 
are tangents of the conic at the point pi and p2 respectively. 
The line P is called the polar of the point p. 

Any line through p intersects the polar F in a point po, 
which is the fourth harmonic point to p with respect to the 
two intersections of ppo with the conic. 

If Pi and P2 are the polars of the two points pi and p^ 
with regard to a conic, then the line connecting the points 


Fig. 30. 


pi and P2 is the polar of the point of intersection of Pi and 
P2, and inversely. 

This gives a means to construct the tangents on a conic; 
for instance, a circle. 

As has been seen, the harmonic relation between four 
points exists in projective geometry. This shows that this 
relation, while usually considered as metric and introduced 
as such, in its nature is not a metric relation but a positional 
relation. 


110 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

4. If we have, in Fig. 31, four points a, b, c, d, in a 
plane, and draw the six Unes through them, ah, ac, ad, he, 
bd, cd, and denote the three additional points of intersection 
of these six lines by e = ah, cd;f = ac, hd; g = ad, he, and 


Fig. 31. 

draw the three additional lines ef, eg and fg, we get a total 
of nine lines and four points on each of these nine lines. 
Each of these nine groups of points is composed of four 
harmonic points. 

This shows the positional nature of the four harmonic 
points. 

J. THE METRIC AXIOM AND THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 

In Lecture I, and more completely in Lecture III, we 
have seen that the laws of the motion in a gravitational 
field are identical with the laws of inertial motion in an 
accelerated system, and that the former — that is, the law 
of gravitation^ — can be derived as the equations of mathe- 
matical transformation to an accelerated system without 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 111 

making any assumption on the physical nature of the gravi- 
tational force. In this manner Einstein has derived his 
law of gravitation. This transformation, however, which 
leads to the law of gravitation, is not entirely without 
arbitrary assumption, as it would appear to be at first. 
The law of gravitation is a metric relation. We have seen, 
however, in the preceding that metric relations do not exist 
in general space, but space in general is projective, involv- 
ing only relations of position, and that a particular char- 
acteristic of space, a metric axiom, is necessary to give 
relations of size and measurement between figures in a 
space, or between two spaces, such as the elliptic space of 
the gravitational field and the Euclidean characteristic of 
fieldless space. Einstein's derivation of the law of gravita- 
tion, however, assumes the possibility of a mathematical 
transformation to the accelerated system, which is of 
metric nature; that is, assumes the existence of metric rela- 
tions and therefore requires the selection of a metric axiom. 
Any axiom which establishes metric relations would obvi- 
ously fulfill the conditions of permitting the transformation 
to the accelerated system, and thus give a law of gravita- 
tion. Thus many different forms of the law of gravitation 
could be derived, since different forms of metric axioms 
could be chosen and the form of the metric axiom is arbi- 
trary. Einstein chose the metric axiom which gives the 
simplest formulation of the physical and mathematical 
laws. This is it: ''Whatever may be the characteristic or 
curvature of the space, and however it may vary from 
point to point or remain constant, an element of space — 
that is, an infinitely small part of it — is plane or Euclidean." 
The general geometry of space (whether 2-space, that is, 
plane geometry, or 3-space, that is, solid geometry) is pro- 
jective or non-metrical; that is, it deals with problems of 
position only, and its space is merely a dimensional con- 
tinuous manifold, as discussed before. Metric relations, 
such as equality of length, area, volume, congruence, the 
relation of smaller or larger, proportionality, the distinction 


112 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

between finite and infinitely distant, etc., are foreign to 
general space, but require an additional property of space 
beyond that of being a continuous manifold, namely, the 
property, that measurement^ — that is, comparison of sizes 
of figures — can be carried out. Measurement is carried out 
by bringing figures into coincidence — that is, the measuring 
rule with the length to be measured, the area to be measured 
with the unit area used as measure, the triangles which are 
to be proven as congruent with each other, etc. To make 
this possible it is necessary that figures can be moved in 
space without changing. Obviously, if moving a figure, as 
a triangle, would change its size, we could not prove or 
discuss the equality or congruence of two figures by moving 
one into coincidence with the other, since when we moved it 
it would not be the same figure any more. Metric space is, 
therefore, characterized, in distinction to general space, by 
the additional axiom: 

"Figures can be moved in space without change of their 
size or of the size of their component parts." 

This metric axiom leads to the condition that the charac- 
teristic, or curvature, of the space must be constant. Thus 
there are only three spaces in which complete metric rela- 
tions are possible, the Euclidean or plane, the elliptic and 
the hyperbolic space. Complete metric relations, such as 
congruence of figures, etc., exist only within a space of 
constant curvature or between different spaces of the same 
curvature, as between the plane and the conical surface 
(zero 2-space) or between the sphere and the surface of a 
spindle of the same curvature as the sphere. They do not 
exist, for instance, between the plane and the sphere — 
2-spaces of different curvature. A triangle in the plane and 
a triangle on a sphere can never be congruent and can never 
be made to coincide. If the sides of the two triangles were 
equal and I try to make them coincide, I have to stretch or 
contract the area of one to make it fit the other, and this 
changes its area, its angles, etc., so that it is not the same 
triangle any more. The same thing is true with two spheri- 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 113 

cal triangles of different curvature, as, for instance, located 
at two different parts of an egg-shaped surface, a 2-space of 
varying positive curvature. The metric relation of con- 
gruence, or proportionality, etc., does not exist in a space 
of varying curvature, as figures cannot be moved to bring 
them into coincidence without changing their shape by 
stretching or contracting. 

It is not possible, therefore, to represent an elliptic 2- 
space— like the surface of the earth — on a plane 2-space — 
as in a plane map^ — without distorting the dimensions, 
getting the different parts out of proportion with each 
other. 

Nevertheless, a partial metric relation is possible in spaces 
of varying curvature or between spaces of different curva- 
ture. For instance, we measure the length of a curve, like 
the circumference of a circle, by comparing it with a straight 
line.^ We measure the area of a sphere or a part of it (as 
the surface of the earth or that of a country) by comparing 
it with a flat or plane unit area- — for instance, a square mile 
— though this can be done only indirectly and there is no 
possibility of physically carrying out such measurement, 
as we can never make a flat unit area coincide with a curved 
surface or a part of it. We can do it, however, by compar- 
ing the two, the curved line and the straight line, or the 
curved area and the flat unit area, element by element. 
If we desired to measure the circumference of a circle 
three feet in diameter by a straight rule one foot in length, 
we should get very inaccurate results, as a rule one foot in 
length cannot be made to coincide with the curved peri- 
phery of the circle. If, however, we were to use a straight 
rule one inch in length, we should get much more accurate 
results in measuring a circle three feet in diameter, as the 

^ It appears to us obvious now that the length of a curved line can be 
measured, that is, compared with the length of a straight measuring rod; 
but this is not at all so obvious, and it was a matter of serious discussion by 
the great mathematicians of ancient time whether there could be such a 
thing as a "measurement" of the circumference of a circle. 
8 


114 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

one-inch straight rule could be made almost to coincide 
with a part of the periphery. The shorter the straight rule 
we use, the more accurately it will coincide with the curved 
periphery of the circle and the more accurate will be the 
measurement, and if it were possible to use an infinitely 
short rule in measuring the length of a curved line, we 
should get perfect accuracy. This means, in other words, 
that the shorter a part of a curved line is the straighter it is, 
and that an infinitely short part of a curved line is 
straight. 

The same applies with areas or surfaces. The smaller 
a part of a curved surface is the planer it is, and an infinitely 
small part of a curved surface is plane. 

This makes it possible to measure the length of curved 
lines, the area of curved surfaces, the volume of curved 
spaces, etc. The characteristics are: 

"A piece of a curved line is the straighter the shorter it is, 
and an infinitely short piece of a curved line is straight." 

"A piece of a curved surface is the planer the smaller it is, 
and an infinitely small piece of a curved surface is plane." 

''A piece of a curved space is the planer the smaller it is, 
and an infinitely small piece of a curved (or non-Euclidean) 
space is plane, that is, Euclidean." 

This, however, is not an inherent property of space. It 
does not hold for the general or non-metric space, but it is a 
special condition imposed upon space. It is a metric 
axiom, the adoption of which gives to space characteristics 
beyond those of general space, namely, the property that 
measurements can be made in space. 

For instance, at the point of the cone, or at the singular 
line of the pseudo-sphere, this axiom does not hold, and no 
matter how small a piece at the point of the cone or the 
singular line of the pseudo-sphere we take, it never is plane 
or Euclidean. This condition that the space element is 
Euclidean applies to all spaces of constant curvature, and 
therefore, in describing the characteristics of these spaces, 
we said, for instance, referring to elliptic space: ''The sum 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 115 

of the angles in a triangle is greater than 180 degrees, the 
more so the larger the triangle." In an infinitely small 
triangle of elliptic space the sum of the angles is 180 
degrees, because an infinitely small piece of elliptic space is 
Euclidean. 

However, the spaces of constant curvature are more 
special than the space with the Euclidean element. For 
instance, an egg-shaped surface does not have constant 
curvature, but its element is Euclidean. 

We thus have here three successive gradations of the 
conception of mathematical space: 

1. The general space, as a continuous manifold, in which 
a geometry of position exists, but no metric geometry. 

2. The differential metric space, that is, the general space 
with the differential metric axiom added, the axiom that an 
element of the space is Euclidean. This permits those metric 
relations which can be derived by segregation into elements 
(line elements, surface elements, etc.) and permits measure- 
ment of lengths and areas, but not comparison of figures, 
such as congruence, as motion of figures in the space is not 
possible without change. 

3. The completely metric space — that is, the differential 
metric space with the integral metric axiom added, the 
axiom that figures can be moved in space without change 
of shape. This gives the space of constant curvature, 
Euclidean, elliptic or hyperbolic. 

The differentially metric space, established by the axiom 
that the element of the space is plane or Euclidean, is not 
the most general metric space, but the most general metric 
space would be established by the differential metric axiom 
that all the elements of the space are of the same character- 
istic. But whether this characteristic of the space element 
is Euclidean or of any other form is arbitrary. That is : 

2o. The general differential metric space is the general 
space with the axiom added that all the elements of the 
space have the same characteristic. That is, if ds is a line 
element and dxi an element of the coordinate Xi (where 


116 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

i = 1 and 2 for 2-space, 1, 2 and 3 for 3-space, 1.2 — n for 
7i-space), it is: 

^§2 _ p{dx^ = independent of Xi] 

that is, dsMs a constant quadratic function of the coordinate 
element dXi. 

For the special differential metric space, in which the ele- 
ments are Euclidean, it is: 

ds"^- = Hdxi"^, 

while in general, for differential metric 3-space, it is: 

ds^ = Qidxi^ + g2dx2^ + gsdx^^ + giidxidx^ + g^zdxidxz + 

As the elliptic space of the gravitational field and the 
Euclidean space of fieldless regions have a different curva- 
ture, complete metric relations, such as congruence of fig- 
ures in the two spaces, cannot exist between them. Since, 
however, both spaces are differentially metric spaces — 
that is, their elements are Euclidean- — such metric relations 
as exist in differentially metric spaces- — that is, comparison 
of the length of lines, areas of surfaces, volumes of bodies — 
exist between elliptic and Euclidean space. In the trans- 
formation to an accelerated system, which leads to his 
formulation of the law of gravitation, Einstein therefore 
makes the assumption of the existence of the differentially 
metric axiom. This is necessary, as without it no metric 
relations could be established, but nevertheless it is an 
arbitrary feature, justified only by the simplicity of the 
results. 

K. VISUAL APPEARANCE OF CURVED SPACE 

The distance of an object we estimate by the difference 
in the direction in which we see it from the two eyes. Thus, 
if, in Fig. 32, 0 is an object and Ai and A2 the two eyes, 
the difference in the two lines of sight AiO and AoO gives 
us the distance of 0. If 0 is further away, the lines AiO 
and A2O differ less in direction, and finally, when 0 is 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 117 

infinitely far away, the two lines of sight A^O and AiO 
have the same direction. That an object is infinitely dis- 
tant (that is, very far distant) we thus recognize by the 


Fig. 32. 

two lines of sight from our eyes to the object having the 
same direction. 

This is in Euclidean space. 

How would elliptic and hyperbolic space look to us? 

In elliptic space there is no infinite distance, and the 
straight line is finite in length. Thus, if there were no 
obstructions and no light-absorbing medium, the line of 
sight from the eye should return into itself; that is, every- 
where where the view is free we should see the back of our 
head covering all open space^ — because all lines of vision, 
in whatever direction we look, return into themselves 
through the back of our head. However, this is meaning- 
less in our universe, since, though finite, it is so enormously 
large — the length of the straight line being equal to about 
400,000,000 light-years^ — that light would have been 
absorbed long before it had completed the closed path. 

In elliptic space there is no infinite distance and the 
straight line is finite in length. We would estimate the 
distance of an object 0 in the same manner as in Fig. 32, 
by the difference in the direction of the two lines of vision 
from the two eyes to the object, and the further the object 
is away the less is the difference in this direction, until 
finally, when the object is at the distance of one-quarter 
the length of the line (one quadrant of the circle as which 
the straight line of the elliptic space appears to us from a 
higher Euclidean space), the two lines of vision AiO and 
A2O have the same direction; that is, the object 0 appears 
at infinite distance. Thus, though elliptic space is finite 
in extent, every object at a quarter-line length from our 


118 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

eyes appears infinitely distant. When we move toward it, 
it comes into finite distance, and finally we reach it in a 
finite distance, while other objects beyond it now have 
come into quarter-line distance and appear infinitely 
distant. 

Thus, visually, infinity exists in the finite elliptic space, 
and we see objects apparently at infinite distance, but can 
reach them in finite distance. 

In the hyperbolic space each line L (Fig. 33) has two 
parallels Li and Lo through a point P — that is, two lines 


Fig. 33. 

which intersect L at infinity — and these tvv^o parallels Li 
and L2 make an angle L1PL2 with each other. Thus L] 
differs in direction from L at the point P, though parallel, 
that is, intersecting it at infinity. Thus, if I look at a 
receding object 0 in hyperbolic space, the difference in the 
direction of the two lines of vision from the two eyes, AiO 
and A2O (Fig. 32) gets the less the further the object is 
away. But even when the object 0 is infinitely far away, 
the two lines of sight toward it still differ in direction by 
the angle by which two parallels differ in hyperbolic space, 
and the object therefore appears to be at finite distance. 
Visually there is no infinite distance in hyperbolic space, 
but all objects appear at finite distance, even infinitely dis- 
tant objects. But such infinitely distant objects, though 
appearing at finite distance to the view, never get any 
nearer, no matter how far we move toward them. Wc 
may estimate their (apparent) distance and move toward 
them by this distance and more, and still they appear just 
as far, at the same apparently finite distance. (This 
reminds us of the similar characteristic of the velocity of 
light c in the relativity theory, which is finite, c = 3 X 10^'' 
cm., but still inapproachable, as no combination or addi- 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 119 

tion of lesser velocities can ever add to a sum equal to c.) 

Helmholtz has shown that we can get a view of hyper- 
bolic space by looking at our space through a large, slightly 
concave lens which covers both eyes. 

We thus find: 

Euclidean space is infinite in extent, appears infinite 
visually and is unbounded. 

Elliptic space is finite in extent, but appears infinite 
visually and is unbounded. Objects at a quarter-line 
distance appear infinitely distant. 

Hyperbolic space is infinite in extent, but appears finite 
visually and is unbounded. 

L. THE TWO-DIMENSIONAL ANALOGUE OF THE UNI- 
VERSE, AND THE MATHEMATICAL CONCEPTION 

OF IT 

The relativity theory has reconfirmed the law of con- 
servation of energy, but has denied the law of con- 
servation of matter by showing matter as kinetic energy, 
moc^, where c = velocity of light and mo is a constant. 
Mass then is represented by: 

moC^ + E 


m 


_ v^ 


where v is the relative velocity and E the non-kinetic energy 
of the body. 

The constancy of the mass then is approximate only as 
long as V is small compared with c and E small compared 
with WqC^. This is the case at all but ionic velocities and 
energies. 

The gravitational field of matter, then, is of the character 
of an accelerated system, and in the gravitational field the 
laws of the Euclidean geometry cease to hold and space 
shows a positive or elliptic curvature. 

Space, then, and its characteristic or curvature are 
functions of matter and thus of energy. That is, space is 


120 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

plane or Euclidean in the absence of matter and becomes 
elliptic or positively curved in the presence of matter, the 
more so the larger the amount of matter present ; that is, the 
greater the gravitational field, as we say. 

The universe, as we know, consists of isolated huge 
masses, the fixed stars, which are surrounded by their 
gravitational fields, but separated from each other by 
enormous distances of empty or practically empty and 
therefore essentially Euclidean space. At the masses of 
the fixed stars the curvature of the universe thus is positive; 
in their gravitational fields it gradually tapers down to zero 
in the fieldless space between the fixed stars. Geometric- 
ally, we may thus picture for ourselves a two-dimensional 
analogy of our universe by replacing the fixed stars with 
very shallow spherical segments — ^positive 2-space — which 
continue as very shallow conical surfaces^ — ^the gravitational 
fields- — ^into the flat Euclidean planes of fieldless space, as 
shown in the reproduction of such a model in Fig. 34.^ 
As has been seen, owing to the curvature of the spherical 
segments (the masses), if we traverse the model in a straight 
line, we gradually curve in a direction at right angles to the 
plane of the model^ — that is, into the third dimension- — • 
so that we return to our starting point after passing about 
twelve masses. This shows how the existence of positively 
curved regions (masses) makes the total universe of finite 
extent. 

However, this analogy of a two-dimensional model with 
our universe must not be carried too far, as it is deficient in 
an essential feature. In the 2-space we have either positive 
or negative or zero curvature, depending on whether the 
two radii of curvature of the surface are in the same direc- 
tion or in opposite direction, or whether one is zero. In 

' This Fig. 34 shows the two-dimensional analogy of our universe about 
one million times exaggerated. That is, the actual curvature is about one- 
millionth as much as shown, or, instead of twelve, about twelve million 
masses are passed before a straight line returns into itself in the physical 
universe. 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SPACE 121 

3-space, however, there are three radii of curvature, and 
combinations exist which have no analogy in 2-space and 
therefore cannot be illustrated by analogy with it. This 
limits the completeness of the 2-space analogies with 3- 
space relations, so that the preceding can be considered 
only as giving a rather crude conception of the 3-space 
characteristics. 

Physical space, we have seen, is not a space of constant 
curvature, but of a curvature which varies from point to 
point with the distribution of matter. From what we 
have discussed, therefore, it follows that the metric axioms 
do not rigidly hold in physical space, and figures cannot 
be moved in space without stretching or contracting when 
passing from a point of space to a point of different curva- 
ture. Measurements and dimensional relations, therefore, 
are not rigidly possible in physical space, and strictly, we 
cannot speak of the length or the size of a body, as we can- 
not measure it by bringing the measure to it, because the 
length and shape of the measure change when it is moved 
through space. Thus length and size are not fixed proper- 
ties of a body, but depend on the conditions under which 
they are determined, and this brings us back to the conclu- 
sions of the first lecture on the relativity of length and time. 

Instead of the physical conception of mass as a kinetic 
energy which causes a curvature, a deformation or ''kink" 
in space, we may start from the mathematical side and 
consider mass and its gravitational field as the manifesta- 
tion or physical representation of a curvature of space. 
We may consider physical space as varying in curvature 
between zero and positive values. In other words, space, 
though in general of zero curvature, or Euclidean, contains 
singular points, or rather regions of positive curvature, 
which we call ''masses." In a region surrounding a region 
of positive curvature or ''mass" the curvature of the space 
gradually changes from the positive values in the mass to 
zero at distance from the mass, and such a region we call 
the gravitational field of the mass. Energy then becomes 


122 RELATIVITY AND SPACE 

space curvature, and the characteristic constant of space 
is the measure of energy. 

The hmitations of this mathematical conception of the 
physical universe are that the electromagnetic energy and 
the electromagnetic field do not yet satisfactorily fit into it. 


INDEX 


Aberration of light, 15 
Absolute number, meaning, 38 
Accelerated motion, and gravitation, 

52 
Acceleration, 9, 47 
Action at distance, 19 
Alternating current, 14 

dielectric field, 20 
Analogue, 2 dimensional, of uni- 
verse, 119 
Axioms of mathematics, 70 

metric, of space, 95, 110 

B 

Beltrami's pseudosphere, 91 

Bending of space, 88 

Betel geuse, 67 

Bolyai, 71 

Bullet velocity, 13 

C 

Capacity and wave velocity, 23 
Centrifugal field, 47 

force and inertia, 49 

mass, 47 
Characteristic of space, 69 

constant of space, 81 
Charge, electrostatic, 47 
Circle, in centrifugal and gravita- 
tional field, 62 

circumference and diameter, 61 
Color, relatively, 7 
Combination of velocities in rela- 
tivity, 42 
Comet, orbits, 60 

velocity, 13 
Completely metric space, 115 
Cone, as Euclidean 2-space, 90 
Conic in projective geometry, 107 


Constant, characteristic, of space, 81 
Coordinates of space elements, 92 
Corpuscular theory of light, 13 
Curvature of bundle as 2-space, 102 

of curve, 82 

of space, 80, 81, 83 
Cylinder, as Euclidean 2-space, 90 

D 

Deflection of light in gravitational 
field, 55 

angle and equation, 59 
Detonation velocity, 13 
Dielectric field, 18 

intensity, 47 
Differential metric space, 115 
Dimensions of physical space, 97 
Direction of curve, 82 
Distance between two events, 32 

measure of time, 33 

E 

Earth as elliptic 2-space, 75 
Einstein, law of gravitation, 11 
Electric field, 47 

quantity, 47 
Electricity, constancy of speed, 4 
Electromagnet, 20 
Electromagnetic field, 21 

wave, 17, 21 
frequency, 22 
Electron velocity, 8 
Electrostatic charge, 47 

field, 18 
ElUptic geometry, 64, 72, 74 

trigonometry, 77 
Energy equivalent of mass, 44 

field, 22, 46 

kinetic, 47 

and mass, 41 

of wave, 22 


123 


124 


INDEX 


Entity energy, 24 

Equations of transformation to 

moving system, 25, 27 
Ether, 12, 14 

as solid, 14 

drift, 14 

fallacy of conception, 16 

illogical, 18 

unnecessary, 17 

waves, 18 
Euclid, 71 
Euclidean geometry, 64, 72, 74 

F 

Fallacy of ether conception, 16 
Faraday, 12, 17 
Field, centrifugal, 47 

dielectric, 18 

electromagnetic, 21 

electrostatic, 18 

gravitational, 18, 46, 47 

magnetic, 18 

of energy, 22 

of force, 12, 18 
Finite volume of universe, 63 
Force, magnetic, 46 
Four-dimensional space with sphere 

as element, 99 
Fraction, meaning of, 38 
Frequencies of electromagnetic 

waves, 22 
Friction of ether, 14 

G 

Gauss, 71 

General differential space, 115 
geometry, 64 

or projective geometry space, 115 
Geometry, 64 

of gravitational field, 69 
Gravitation, 46 

as accelerated motion, 52 

as centrifugal force of radial 

acceleration, 55 
as inertia of accelerated system, 

53 
laws of, 9, 11, 50 

and metric axiom, 110 


Gravitational field, 18, 21, 47 

and deflection of light, 55, 59 

as space curvature, 121 

its geometry, 69 

intensity, 47 

shifting of spectrum lines, 68 
Gravitational force as centrifugal 
force of imaginary velocity, 55 

and inertia, 53 
Gravitational mass, 47 


H 


in projective 


Harmonic relation 
geometry, 108 
as non-metric, 110 
Hertz, 17, 21 

Hyperbolic geometry, 64, 72, 74 
Hypersurface, 88 
Hypothesis of ether abandoned, 16 


Imaginary number, meaning, 38 

rotation, meaning, 39 

representing relativity, 35 
Inductance and wave velocity, 23 
Inertial mass, 47 

Infinitely distant elements in geom- 
etry, 96 
Intensity of dielectric field, 47 

of gravitational field, 47 

of magnetic field, 47 
Interference of light, 13 

K 

Kinetic energy, 44, 47 
Kinks, in space, 90 


Law of gravitation, 50 

Length, relativity, 6 
of straight line, 87 
shortening by motion, 5, 28 
transformation by motion, 26 


INDEX 


125 


Light, constancy of speed, 4 

as wave, 13 

deflection in gravitational field, 
55, 59 

orbit of beam, 59, 60 

-year, 34 
Limit velocity, that of light, 42 
Lines of force, 18 

as space element in bundle, 100 
Lobatschewsky, 71 
Lorentz transformation, 26 


M 


Magnet, permanent, 18 
Magnetic field, 18, 48 

intensity, 47 
Magnetic pole strength, 47 
Manifold, continuous dimensional, 

92 
Mass, centrifugal, 47 

and energy, 41 

as space curvature, 121 

gravitational, 47 

inertial, 47 

relativity, 8 
Mathematical conception of mass, 
121 

space and physical space, 92 
Mathematics, relative and not abso- 
lute, 70 
Matter, law of conservation, 8 
Maxwell, 12, 17, 21 
Mercury, planet, 13 
Metric axiom, differential, 115 

and law of gravitation, 110 

of space, 95, 110 
Metric relations in space, 95 

partial, 113 
Minkowski's four-dimensional space, 
24 


N 


Negative number, meaning, 38 
Newton, law of gravitation, 10 

theory of light, 13 
7i-space, 93 


O 


Orbit of beam of light in gravita- 
tional field, 59 
cosmic, 59 


Parabolic geometry {See Euclidean 

geometry) 
Parallels, 64 

axiom, 72 
Partial metric relations, 113 
Pathcurve of train, 30 
Periodic phenomenon or wave, 20 
Phase of wave, 14 
Physical space, dimensions, 97 

and mathematical, 92 
Plane geometry (See Euclidean 

geometry). 
Planet, orbit, 59 
Point as element of space, 92 
Polar, 108 
Polarization, 14 
Pole and polar, 108 

strength, magnetic, 47 
Position geometry (See General 
geometry or Projective geom- 
etry). 
Projective geometry, 72, 74, 107 
Pseudosphere, Beltrami's, 91 
Pseudospherical or hyperbolic geom- 
etry 

Q 

Quantity, electric, 47 

R 

Radius of curv^ature, 82 

of space, 83 

of world, 65 
Ray as space element in bundle, 100 
Riemann, 71 
Rigidity of ether, 14 
Rotation, imaginary, meaning, 39 

representing relativity, 35 
Rotation of pathcurve of train, 31 


QC 6.S8 


126 


Sense perceptions as primary, 23 
Simultaneousness of events, 28 
Singular points and lines in space, 90 
Six-dimensional physical space, 97 
Space, bending of, 88 
characteristic, 69 
curved, visional appearance, 116 
general, 95 

mathematical and physical, 92 
Spectrum lines, shift in gravitational 

field, 68 
Speed, length and time, 8 (See 

velocity). 
Sphere as element of four-dimen- 
sional space, 99 
Spherical or elhptic geometry, 74 
trigonometry as plane trigonom- 
etry of elliptic 2-space, 77 
Spindle as elliptic 2-space, 89 
Steam velocity, 13 
Straightest line, 79 
Straight line in curved space, 85 
definition, 79 
length, 87 
on earth, 76, 78 
relativity of, 79, 87 


3 9358 00103908 7 | 

Time effects of gravitational field, 67 
measure of length, 33 
relativity, 6 

slowing down by motion, 5, 28 
transformation by motion, 26 

Track coordinates and train coordi- 
nates, 26 

Tractrix, 91 

Train coordinates and track coordi- 
nates, 26 
pathcurve, 30 

Transverse wave motion of light, 14 

Triangle, sum of angles, 63 


U 

Universe, finite volume, 63 

two-dimensional analogue of, 119 

V 

Velocity combination in relativity 
theory, 42 
factor of shortening of length and 

slowing down of time, 29 
of electromagnetic wave, 23 
of light, 23 
Visual appearance of curved space, 

116 
Volume, finite, of universe, 63, 65 


W 

Tenuity of ether, 14 

Theorems in bundle as elliptic Wave, electromagnetic, 17 

2-space, 103 - and wave motion, 17 

of mathematics, 70 theory of light, 13, 17 


QC6 

S8 

SteinntetZf Charles 
Four lectures on 

space* 1st ed« New 

1923. 

Xf 126 p» dlagrs* 

Proteus, 1865-1923. 
relativity and 
York, McGraw-Hill, 

, plates. 24 cm. 

103908 

( 

MENU 

07 SEP 78 

992066 

NEDDbp 23-6805 

^atf '^vp 


( 


INSTRUCTIONS FOR OBSERVING THE ILLUS- 
TRATIONS STEREOSCOPICALLY 

By a little practice, one can throw these illustrations into 
stereoscopic vision without the use of a stereoscope. This is 
done by the use of a black cardboard barrier to constrain the 
left eye to see only the left image, and the right eye, the right. 
Hold a piece of black cardboard, 3>^ by 8 inches, perpendicular 
to the page, with the Z}4 inch end resting on the page midway 
between the two images. Hold the page so that both images are 
equally illuminated and no shadows on them, and with the end 
of the cardboard touching the nose and forehead. You will 
thus see only one image, which at first may appear unsteady and 
somewhat blurred, both because the image is too close for the 
eyes properly to adjust themselves in focus, and also the angle 
at which the eyes are now required to set themselves is unnatural. 
Slowly move the page and cardboard (the latter held always 
perpendicular to the page) away from the face, concentrating 
persistently on this image and on some single feature of the image, 
su:h as a line intersection, until the page is at the ordinary reading 
distance from the eyes. The lines will then be in focus, the 
single image will stand out in perfect stereoscopic effect, and 
attention can now be turned from the particular feature to the 
image as a whole. The surface of the ball and the lines on it 
will appear curved, as in an actual sphere, and the corrugations 
of the paper surfaces will stand out in relie^, so that the proper 
curvature of the lines can be observed. 

However, to get stereoscopic vision, it is necessary that both 
eyes have the same focal length, or to wear glasses correcting for 
the same focal length.
