LECTURE XIII. 

PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF ILLUMINATING 
ENGINEERING. 

123. The design of an illumination requires the solution of 
physiological as well as physical problems. Physical considera- 
tions, for instance, are the distribution of light-flux intensity 
throughout the illuminated space, as related to size, location 
and number of light sources, while the relation, to the satisfac- 
tory character of the illumination, of the direction of the light, 
its subdivision and diffusion, etc., are physiological questions. 
Very little, however, is known on the latter, although the entire 
field of the physiological effects of the physical methods of 
illumination is still largely unexplored. As result thereof, 
illuminating engineering is not yet an exact science, as is, for 
instance, apparatus design, but much further physiological 
investigation is needed to determine the requirements and 
conditions of satisfactory illumination. 

The physical side of illuminating engineering: — to produce a 
definite light flux density throughout the illuminated space, — 
is ah engineering problem, which can be solved with any desired 
degree of exactness, usually in a number of different ways. 

The solution of the physical problem of light distribution, 
however, does not yet complete the problem of illuminating 
engineering, does not yet assure a satisfactory illumination, but 
with the same distribution of light flux density throughout the 
illuminated surface, the illumination may be anything between 
entirely unsatisfactory and highly successful, depending on the ful- 
fillment or failure to fulfill numerous physiological requirements. 
Some of these are well understood and such that they can be 
taken into consideration in the physical design of the illumina- 
tion, and thus no excuse exists to fail in their fulfillment, though 
it is frequently done. Such, for instance, is the requirement of 
low intrinsic brilliancy in the field of vision, of the color of the 
light, etc. Other physiological requirements are still very little 

277 


278 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

understood or entirely unknown, while on others not sufficient 
quantitative data are available for exact engineering calculation. 

Thus, for instance, the usual suburban street illumination, 
with arcs spaced at considerable distances from each other and 
located on fairly low posts, is very much inferior to the illumina- 
tion given by moonlight, even when allowing for the difference 
in intensity. Here the reason of the unsatisfactory character 
of the former illumination is mainly the almost horizontal direc- 
tion of the light flux. A perfectly vertical direction of the light 
flux again is unsatisfactory in many cases, and the most satis- 
factory results are given by a direction of the light flux which 
makes a considerable angle with the horizontal as well as the 
vertical direction. Thus, when dealing with directed light, the 
direction angle is of essential physiological importance. We 
have very little exact knowledge to guide in the determination 
of the proper angle in which to direct the light flux ; it is known 
that in general approximately horizontal and approximately 
vertical direction of the light flux are objectionable, and an in- 
termediary angle gives best results. However, the horizontal 
direction usually is objectionable by excessive contrasts, the 
vertical direction by flatness in the appearance of the illuminated 
objects, and, depending on the nature of the objects, sometimes 
the one, sometimes the other feature may be more objectionable. 
Hence, the best angle of incidence of the light depends on the 
nature, that is, the shape and location, of the illuminated objects, 
on the purpose of the illumination, etc., and thus is not con- 
stant, but is a function of the problem, which is still largely 
unknown. 

124. Not represented by the physical distribution curve of 
illumination, but very marked in their physiological effect is 
the difference between directed light and diffused light. In most 
problems of illumination, either entirely directed light or entirely 
diffused light is unsatisfactory, and a combination of directed 
light and diffused light is required, as discussed in the preceding 
pages. No exact knowledge, however, exists on the proportion 
in which directed light and diffused light should be combined 
for satisfactory illumination, nor how this proportion varies with 
the nature, color, etc., of surrounding objects, with the purpose 
of the illumination, etc. That it varies is well known, as for 
some purposes, as a draughting room, entirely diffused light 


PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS. 279 

seems best suited, while for other purposes mainly directed light 
seems more satisfactory. 

Furthermore, the relations between directed and diffused light 
have in the illuminating engineering practice been obscured to 
some extent by the relation between high and low intrinsic bril- 
liancy and between direct and indirect lighting. Thus, to 
eliminate the objectionable feature of high intrinsic brilliancy of 
the illuminant, direct lighting by light sources of high brilliancy, 
which was largely directed lighting, has been replaced by indirect 
lighting, by reflection from ceilings, etc., which is diffused light- 
ing. Where such change has resulted in a great improvement of 
the illumination, it frequently has been attributed to the change 
from directed to diffused lighting, while in reality the improve- 
ment may have been due to the elimination of high brilliancy 
light sources from the field of vision, and engineers thereby led 
to the mistaken conclusion that perfectly diffused lighting is the 
preferable form. Again, in other instances such a change from 
direct to indirect lighting has not resulted in the expected im- 
provement, but the indirect lighting been found physiologically 
unsatisfactory, and the conclusion drawn that the elimination 
qf high brilliancy from the field of vision has not been beneficial, 
while in reality the dissatisfaction with the indirect light was due 
to the excess of diffused light and absence of directed light, and 
this improper proportion between directed and diffused light 
more than lost the advantage gained by eliminating the light 
sources of high brilliancy from the field of vision. In this case 
the proper arrangement would have been to reduce the brilliancy 
of the light sources, by diffusing or diffracting globes, to a suffi- 
ciently low value, but leave them in such position as to give the 
necessary directed light. 

Thus, in illuminating engineering, as in other sciences, it is 
very easy to draw erroneous conclusions from experience by 
attributing the results to a wrong cause. Any change in the 
arrangement usually involves other changes: as in the above 
instance, the change from high to low brilliancy commonly 
causes a change from directed to diffused light; by attributing 
the results to a wrong cause, serious mistakes thus may be made 
in basing further work on the results. 

125. In discussing diffused light, we must realize that the 
meaning of " diffused light" is to some extent indefinite. To 


280 


RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 


define diffused light as light which traverses the space in all direc- 
tions and thus casts no shadow, is not correct, since even diffused 
daylight casts shadows. For instance, if in Fig. 122 P is the sur- 


M/w///^^^^^ 

FIG. 122. 

face of the ground and A a flat circular shade at distance I above 
the ground, the intensity distribution of the light in plane P is as 
shown in Fig. 122 for I = 0.2 A, thus showing a fairly dark 
shadow beneath the center of A, but a shadow which blurs so 
very gradually that with most objects it is not marked. 

The light from a single point source 
is perfectly directed light; it traverses 
every point of space in one single 
direction only, as shown as A in Fig. 
123. If we now enclose the point 
source in an opal globe, which then 
becomes the radiator, as discussed 
before, as diagrammatically shown as 
B in Fig. 123, the light flux traverses 
each point not in a single direction but 
in all directions within a narrow angle 
a, which is the angle subtended by 
the radiator L from the point P. 
With increasing size of the illuminant, 
and thus increasing angle a, C, Fig. 
123, the pencil of rays, which traverses 
point P, gradually spreads, until, when 
a becomes 180 deg., we get perfectly 
diffused light, similar to daylight. 
Hence, with a gradual change of the diameter of the illum- 
inant, from a = 0 to a. = 180 deg., the light gradually changes 
from directed to diffused light. Thus, no sharp dividing line 


FIG. 123. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS. 281 

can be drawn between directed light, and diffused light, but 
the directed light from a light source of considerable diameter 
(that is, a diameter which is not neglible compared with the dis- 
tance of the illuminated objects from the light) already has to 
some extent the character of diffused light. 

Diffused light thus may be denned as light given by a radiator 
which subtends a spherical angle equal to a considerable part of 
the sphere. This makes the term "diffused light" a relative 
term. Near to a radiator of considerable size, the light given 
by this radiator thus is largely diffused light, while at considerable 
distance it is practically directed light, or, in other words, the 
light given by light sources of considerable size is directed light 
only at such distances from the radiator at which the law of 
inverse squares holds; but approaching the radiator so far 
that this law of inverse squares (flux density inverse proportional 
to the square of the distance) does not hold, the light approaches 
somewhat the character of diffused light. 

The physiological effects, however, during a gradual change 
from a = 0, or directed light, to a = 180 deg. , or diffused light, 
apparently do not change uniformly, but new effects appear 
and others disappear. 

126. The main objection to directed light from a single source 
results from the absence of light in the shadows. Using, how- 
ever, two or more illuminants, that is, combining directed light 
of several widely different directions, the shadow cast by one 
illuminant is illuminated by the other illuminants, and thus an 
effect produced very similar to diffusion. Thus with two light 
sources, at a point at which both light sources give the same 
illumination, the intensity in the shadow cast by one illuminant 
is still 50 per cent, that is, the illumination the same as if equal 
volumes of directed and of diffused light were combined, and 
to a considerable extent the physiological effect is the same. 
It is not completely so, however. In the illumination by equal 
volumes of diffused light and directed light from a single source, 
each object casts a single shadow, in which the illumination is 
reduced to half. When producing an equivalent diffusion by 
two light sources, an object casts two shadows, in which the 
illumination is reduced to half (if the two light sources give 
equal illumination), but, where the shadows overlap, a perfectly 
black and lightless shadow is produced. The more the two 


282 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

half shadows overlap to a complete shadow, the less the combina- 
tion of the two light sources is equivalent to diffusion. At 
the same time, occasionally the existence of two or more half 
shadows and of their compound shadows may assist distinction, 
and thereby be advantageous. In short, there is a vast and 
largely unexplored field in the physiology of illumination, 
which the illuminating engineer will have to study and investi- 
gate. 

While one point source of light gives directed light, two 
sources at distances from each other give an effect equivalent 
to diffusion, and three or more sources still more so, until in the 
theoretical case of an infinite number of point sources distributed 
through space — or, practically, a very large number of distrib- 
buted illuminants — we get perfect diffusion. With a change 
from a single to a very large number of illuminants, the illumi- 
nation thus changes from directed to diffused, and thus, for 
a moderate number of illuminants, is intermediate between 
directed and diffused, but nevertheless this intermediate state is 
physiologically of entirely different character from that given 
by a single illuminant of very large diameter, that is large 
angle a, as discussed above. 

127. We thus have true diffused light, as daylight, the equiva- 
lent diffusion given by the combination of several light sources, 
which depends on their relative location, and the equivalent 
diffusion given by a large relative diameter of the light source. 
The latter again varies with the shape of the light source, and 
in extreme cases, as a linear straight radiator, as a Geissler tube 
(Moore tube), we may get an illumination which, at any point 
of space, is practically diffused in one direction, and practically 
directed in a direction at right angle to the former. In such 
cases we again get different physiological phenomena. For 
instance, a straight rod, held parallel to the radiator, casts a 
sharp black shadow — directed light — while, when held at right 
angles to the radiator, it casts no shadow — diffused light. With 
objects of more irregular shape, it can be seen that the shape 
and appearance of the shadows give a rather interesting problem, 
and the physiological impression made by such illumination 
thus is different again, from that of ordinary directed or diffused 
light or their combination. 

In general, wherever two or more illuminants are used, the 


PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS. 283 

physiological effect depends on the relative position of the light 
sources to the illuminated objects, irrespective of the intensity of 
illumination. Thus, for instance, in the illumination shown in 
Fig. 117, on the same curve of equal illumination, the physiologi- 
cal effect is not constant, but varies from point to point. On the 
curve of 850 near the center of the room, an object casts four 
shadows of approximately equal intensity, in different direc- 
tions. The shadows are sufficiently marked to assist in seeing, 
and the illumination in the shadow is quite high ; thus the illumi- 
nation is very satisfactory. On the same curve 850, near the 
edge of the room, the four shadows fall in nearly the same 
direction, only one is marked, and by the overlap of the shadows 
a large compound shadow is formed, in which the illumination 
is very low, distinction difficult, and the illumination thus 
unsatisfactory. Thus with the same physical value of illumina- 
tion, on the same curve 850, the physiological effect in this case 
changes from a very satisfactory illumination at one place, 
to a quite unsatisfactory illumination at another place. Thus, 
in this instance, while the solution of the illuminating problem, 
given in Fig. 117, is physically perfect, that is, the illumination 
very uniform throughout the entire room, and the efficiency 
high, physiologically the illumination is satisfactory only in 
the middle of the room, but becomes more and more unsatisfac- 
tory the further we go outside of the square formed by the four 
light sources. Physiologically the illumination would probably 
be improved by locating the light sources in the four corners 
of the ceiling, or in the centers of the four sides of the ceiling. 
Physically, this arrangement of lamps in the corners of the room 
would greatly reduce the efficiency, thus require either more 
power, or lower the average illumination; the arrangement of 
the lamps at the sides would decrease the efficiency less, but 
would considerably impair the uniformity of illumination, giving 
a lower illumination near the corners of the room. 

Furthermore, in illuminating engineering, enters as an impor- 
tant and largely unknown factor, the effect on the physical and 
physiological illumination, of the objects in the illuminated 
space, and of the observer] that is, the light flux distribution 
and its physiological effect, as depending on the location of 
light sources and distribution of their light flux through the 
illuminated space, is not sufficient to solve the problem of 


284 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

illumination, but consideration must be given to the changes 
resulting from the use of the illumination. For instance, in 
the illumination shown in Fig. 117, and discussed above, the 
diffused light, 0.250, resulting from reflection from walls and 
ceiling, is quite considerable, and would be nearly sufficient 
for giving distinction in the compound shadow of all four illumi- 
nants, as it exists in a pronounced degree near the walls. Thus 
even there the illumination would be moderately fair. How- 
ever, when relying on this diffused illumination to see in the 
shadow of objects close to the walls, it may not be present, or 
largely reduced by the shadow of the observer, since, as seen 
above, diffused light also casts shadows, though the blur at 
the edges of these shadows is such as to make them very little 
noticeable. Thus, when approaching close to the walls to look 
at an object, we may find it shaded from the direct light and 
from most of the diffused light, thus giving unsatisfactory 
illumination. Locating the light sources in the corners or the 
centers of the sides of the room, we get pronounced shadows 
of the objects located against the walls of the room, and thereby 
again unsatisfactory illumination, although in this case, physio- 
logically, considering merely the room without the objects which 
may be located in it, the illumination would be satisfactory. 
Thus we may have to sacrifice uniformity of illumination still 
further, by arranging five light sources, four in the corners 
of centers of the sides of the room, and one, of larger light flux, 
in the center of the ceiling. 

Thus, occasionally, illuminations designed for uniform flux 
density are not satisfactory, even though the proportion of 
directed and of diffused light, and the direction of the directed 
light, is physiologically correct, because the changes resulting 
from the objects in the room, and the person of the user of the 
illumination, are not sufficiently considered. 

129. The cause of most of these difficulties in dealing with 
illuminating problems is that, physiologically, light is not a 
vector quantity; that is, light flux densities cannot be combined 
by the parallelogram law. 

Two magnetomotive forces A and B, Fig. 124, acting on the 
same point P, combine by the parallelogram law to a resultant 
C; that is, the combined action of A and B is identical with the 
action of a single m.m.f. C. Thus the m.m.f. existing at any 


PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS. 


285 


point P of space is perfectly characterized by two quantities 
only — the resultant intensity, C, and its direction. 

If, however, in Fig. 125, A and B represent the two light 
flux densities produced at point P by two light sources I/t 
and L2, their physiological and also their physical action may 
be entirely different from that of one light flux C derived by 
combining A and B by the parallelogram law. 


FIG. 124. 


FIG. 125. 


In some respects the action of the two separate flux densities 
A and B is the same, or nearly the same, as that of a resultant 
flux density C; the illumination of an opaque plane a, located 
so that both light sources Ll and L2 are on the same side of the 
plane, is the same. If, however, the illuminated plane is trans- 
parent or translucent, and also in regard to the effects of polariza- 
tion, reflection etc., the effect of the two separate flux densities 
A and B differs from that of a single resultant C. Entirely 
different is the effect if the light sources Lt and L2 are on dif- 
ferent sides of the plane. Thus, with a plane c located in the 
direction C, the resultant flux density C would give no illumina- 
tion, while in reality by A and B both sides of the plane are 
fairly well illuminated. Thus, with the plane in any direction 
within the angle cu between PL2 and PA, it receives the same 
amount of light from A and B as it would receive from (7; but 
in any direction within the angle T = 7t — to, between PA and 
PB, it receives more light from A and B than it would receive 


286 


RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 


from the resultant C, and receives infinitely more light in the 
direction c (that is, in this direction it receives no light from C). 
Within this angle T, both sides of the plane are illuminated 
by A and B, which obviously is never possible by a resultant 
vector C. 

In the illumination of a plane, the differences between the ac- 
tual illumination by A and B and the illumination which would 
result, if light were a vector quantity, by (7, are only those of 
intensity of illumination. With an object of different shape, 
however, the phenomenon becomes far more complex. Thus the 
illumination of a sphere S by the resultant C would be as shown 
in Fig. 126, — half the sphere dark, the other half light, and with 
a maximum intensity at c, shading off towards zero at the termi- 
nator mn. The actual illumination as shown in Fig. 127 gives a 


FIG. 126. 


FIG. 127. 


black segment of angle <D, while more than half the circumference 
of the sphere is illuminated. The maximum intensity is at the 
same place c, and of the same intensity as in Fig. 123 but 
the total light flux received by the sphere is far greater than 
would be received from the resultant C, and is the sum of the 
light fluxes received from the two light sources. Thus : 

In the illumination of a sphere the light flux densities are 
added, irrespective of their direction, and not vectorially com- 
bined. 

In the illumination of a plane, by light sources which all lie 
on the same side of the plane, the light flux densities are vectori- 
ally combined. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS, 287 

With other shapes of objects, the total received light flux may 
even be more than corresponds to the sum of the component flux 
densities. 

As in general illumination for distinguishing objects we have 
to deal with all possible shapes, it thus follows that for the gen- 
eral problem of illumination the resultant effect is most nearly 
related to the "total flux density" or "total illumination" as 
derived by adding, irrespective of their direction, all the light 
flux densities, as was done in the preceding lectures when dealing 
with light flux distribution. Only in special cases, as the illumi- 
nation of a draughting table, the flux density in one particular 
direction is of importance, and was used as the " horizontal illu- 
mination" in the instance represented by Figs. 119 to 121. 

130. While the resultant effect, or the total illumination, is de- 
rived by adding the flux densities irrespective of their direction, 
in the physiological effect, that is, the appearance, the direction 
plays an essential part. Thus a sphere located as in Fig. 127 
looks different than it looks in Fig. 126, even if it receives the 
same total light flux. Still more marked is this difference with 
more complex shapes of the illuminated objects. Thus a land- 
scape looks different with every different position of the sun in 
the sky, and different again in the diffused light of a cloudy day, 
irrespective of the intensity of the illumination. Under some 
conditions sharp contrasts appear, where under other illumina- 
tions the appearance is flat, and with the change of illumination 
contrasts disappear in some places, appear in others, etc.; that 
is, the appearance of a complex body very greatly varies with 
the character of the illumination, entirely independent of its 
intensity. 

With artificial illumination it then is the problem of the 
illuminating engineer to design the illumination so as to bring 
out contrasts where required by the purpose of the illumination, 
reduce them where too great or unnecessary, etc. If we consider 
the possible personal equations of the user of the illumination 
as depending on his physical nature, occupation or state, further- 
more the effect of the color of light and the marked physiological 
effect which even slight variations in the color shade produce, it 
can be seen that the success of illuminating engineering prob- 
lems still largely depends on the judgment of the designer, and 
this judgment is not yet guided by any extended exact experi- 


288 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

ence, thus rather uncertain. An enormous amount of work is 
still to be done mainly in the field of "engineering physiology/7 
before the design of a system of illumination can approach the 
same exactness as for instance the design of long-distance trans- 
mission or other engineering work.
