LECTURE III. 
PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 

Visibility. 

20. The most important physiological effect is the visibility of 
the narrow range of radiation, of less than one octave, between 
wave length 76 X 10~6 and 39 X 1Q-6. 

The range of intensity of illumination, over which the eye can 
see with practically equal comfort, is enormous: the average 
intensity of illumination at noon of a sunny day is nearly one 
million times greater than the illumination given by the full moon, 
and still we can see fairly well in either case; that is, the human 
eye can adapt itself to enormous differences in the intensity of 
illumination, and that so perfectly that it is difficult to realize the 
differences in intensity without measuring them. The photo- 
graphic camera realizes it. An exposure taken in T^ second 
with TV opening of the diaphragm in full sunlight usually gives a 
better photograph than an exposure of 10 minutes at full opening, 
in the light of the full moon. The ratio of time of exposure in 
the two cases, however, is about 1 to 1,000,000, thus showing the 
difference in the intensity of illumination. Also, the disk of the 
moon, when seen in daylight, has about the same intensity as the 
sky — somewhat more than the cloudless sky, less than white 
reflecting clouds. As the surface of the moon's disk, of one-half 
degree diameter, is about TffsWtf the surface of the sky, it thus 
follows that the daylight reflected from the sky is about 100,000 
times more intense than the light of the full moon. 

The organ by which we perceive the radiation, the human eye 
(Fig. 20), contains all the elements of a modern photographic 
camera — an achromatic lense: the lense L, of high refractive 
power, enclosed between the two transparent liquids A and B 
which correct the color dispersion, that is, give the achromatic 
property; a diaphragm: the iris 7, which allows the increase or 
decrease of the opening P, the pupil; a shutter: the eyelids and 

87 


38 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION 

the sensitive plate or retina R. The nerves of vision end at the 
back of the retina, and in the center of the retina is a spot F, 

the "sensitive spot " or " fova," at which 
the retina is very thin, and the nerve 
ends specially plentiful. At this spot we 
thus see sharpest and clearest, and it is 
this spot we use for seeing by turning 
the eye so as to fix on it the image of 
the subject we desire to see, while the 
image on the rest of the retina is used 
merely for orientation. 

The adaptability to the enormous 
FIG. 20. range of intensity of illumination, which 

as seen we meet in nature, is secured: 

(1). By changing the opening and thereby the amount of light 
admitted to the eye, by contracting or opening the pupil P. This 
action is automatic. In low intensity of illumination the pupil 
thus is wide open and contracts at higher intensities. As this 
automatic action takes an appreciable, though short time, a flash 
light photograph shows the pupil of the eye fully open and thereby 
gives a staring impression to the faces which is avoided by keep- 
ing a photographically inactive light, as a candle, burning outside 
of the field of the camera when preparing for a flash light photo- 
graph. 

(2). By the fatigue of the optic nerves, exposed to high inten- 
sity of illumination, the nerves becomes less sensitive, while at 
low intensity they rest and thus become more sensitive, and the 
differences of sensation are hereby made very much less than 
corresponds to the differences of intensity of radiation. There- 
fore, when entering a brightly illuminated room from the dark- 
ness we are blinded in the first moment, until the eye gets 
accustomed to the light, that is, the nerves become fatigued and 
so reduce the sensation of light. Inversely, when stepping from 
a bright room into the darkness we first see almost nothing until 
the eye gets accustomed to the darkness, that is, the nerves of 
vision are rested and their sensitivity thus increased so as to per- 
ceive the much lower intensity of illumination. 

(3). By the logarithmic law of sensation. The impression made 
on our senses, eye, ear, etc., that is, the sensation, is not propor- 
tional to the energy which produces the sensation, that is, the 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 39 

intensity of the light, the sound, etc., but is approximately 
proportional to its logarithm and the sensation, therefore, 
changes very much less than the intensity of light, etc., which 
causes the sensation. Thus a change of intensity from 1 to 
1000 is 1000 times as great a change of intensity as from 
1 to 2, but the change of sensation in the first case, log 1000 = 3, 
is only about 10 times as great as the change in the latter case, 
log 2 - 0.301. 

This logarithmic law of sensation (Fechner's Law), while usu- 
ally not clearly formulated, is fully familiar to everybody, is con- 
tinuously used in life, and has been used from practical experience 
since by-gone ages. It means that the same relative or percent- 
age change in intensity of light, sound, etc., gives the same change 
of sensation, or in other words, doubling the intensity gives the 
same change in sensation, whether it is a change of intensity from 
one candle power to two candle power, or from 10 to 20, or from 
1000 to 2000 candle power. 

It is obvious that the change of sensation is not proportional to 
the change of intensity; a change of intensity of light by one 
candle power gives a very marked change of sensation, if it is a 
change from one to two candle power, but is unnoticeable, if it is a 
change from 100 to 101 candle power. The change of sensation 
thus is not proportional to the absolute change of intensity — one 
candle power in either case — but to the relative or percentage 
change of intensity, and as this is 100 per cent in the first, 1 per 
cent in the latter case, the change of sensation is marked in the 
first, unnoticeable in the latter case. 

This law of sensation we continuously rely upon in practice. 
For instance, when designing an electrical distribution system for 
lighting, we consider that the variation of voltage by 1 per cent is 
permissible as it gives a change of candle power of about 5 per 
cent, and 5 per cent variation is not seriously noticeable to the eye. 
Now this 5 per cent change of candle power may be a change from 
1 to 0.95, or by -fa candle power, or it may be a change from 1000 
to 950, or by 50 candle power, and both changes we assume, and 
are justified herein from practical experience, to give the same 
change of sensation, that is, to be near the limits of permissi- 
bility. 

This law of sensation (Fechner's Law) means : 

If i = intensity of illumination, as physical quantity, that is, 


40 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

in meter-candles or in watts radiation of specified wave length, 
the physiological effect given thereby is : 

L = A log V 

%> 

where A is a proportionality constant (depending on the physio- 
logical measure of L) and \ is the minimum perceptible value of 
illumination or the "threshold value," below which sensation 
ceases. 

The minimum value of change of intensity i, which is still 
just perceptible to the average human eye, is 1.6 per cent. This, 
then, is the sensitivity limit of the human eye for changes of 
illumination. 

Obviously, when approaching the threshold value i0, the sensi- 
tivity of the eye for intensity changes decreases. 

The result of this law of sensation is that the physiological effect 
is not proportional to the physical effect, as exerted, for instance, 
on the photographic plate. The range of intensities permissible 
on the same photographic plate, therefore, is far more restricted. 
A variation of illumination within the field of vision of 1 to 1000, 
as between the ground and the sky, would not be seriously felt by 
the eye, that is, not give a very great difference in the sensation. 
On the photographic plate, the brighter portions would show 1000 
times more effect than the darker portions and thus give bad 
halation while the latter are still under exposed. A photographic 
plate, therefore, requires much smaller variations of intensity in 
the field of vision than permissible to the eye. In the same man- 
ner the variations of intensity of the voice, used in speaking, are 
far beyond the range of impression which the phonograph cylin- 
der can record, and when speaking into the phonograph a more 
uniform intensity of the voice is required to produce the record, 
otherwise the lower portions of the speech are not recorded, while 
at the louder portions the recording point jumps and the voice 
breaks in the reproduction. 

21. The sensitivity of the eye to radiation obviously changes 
with the frequency, as it is zero in the ultra-red, and in the ultra- 
violet — where the radiation is not visible — and thus gradually 
increases from zero at the red end of the spectrum to a maximum 
somewhere near the middle of the spectrum and then decreases 
again to zero at the violet end of the spectrum; that is, the physi- 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 


41 


ological effect produced by the same radiation power — as one 
watt of radiating power — is a maximum near the middle of the 
visible spectrum and decreases to zero at the two ends, about as 
illustrated by the curves in Fig. 21. Inversely, the mechanical 
equivalent of light, or the power required to produce the same 
physiological effect — as one candle power of light — is a maxi- 
mum near the middle of the spectrum and decreases from 
there to infinity at the end of the visible range, being infinite 


RED 

YELLOW 

GREEN 

BLUE 

VIOLET 

FIG. 21. 

in the ultra-red and ultra-violet, where no power of radiation can 
produce visibility. It thus varies about as indicated in Fig. 22. 

The mechanical power equivalent of light, thus, is not constant, 
as the mechanical energy equivalent of heat — which is 426 kgm. 
or 4.25 kile-joule per calorie — but is a function of the frequency, 
that is, of the color of radiation, with a maximum, probably not 
very far from 0.01 watt per candle power in the middle of the 
spectrum. 

When comparing, however, the physiological effects of different 
frequencies of radiation, that is, different colors of light, the diffi- 
culty arises that different colored lights cannot be compared 
photometrically, as all photometers are based on making the illu- 
mination produced by the two different sources of light equal, and 
when these sources of light are of different color they can never 
become equal. As long as the colors are not very different - 
two different shades of yellow or yellowish white and white — the 
eye can still approximately estimate the equality of intensity and 


42 


RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 


thus compare them, though not as accurately as when the two 
sources of light are of the same color. With very great color 
differences, as green light and orange light, this is no longer 
feasible. However, an accurate comparison can still be made on 
the basis of equal ease in distinguishing objects. As the pur- 


FIG. 22. 

pose for which light is used is to distinguish objects, the correct 
comparison of lights obviously is on the basis of equal distinctness 
of objects illuminated by them; that is, two lights, regardless 
whether of the same or of different colors, give the same candle 
power, that is, the same physiological effect, if they enable us to 
distinguish objects with the same ease at the same distance. 
Experience has shown that the sharpest distinction, that is, the 
greatest accuracy in comparing different lights in this manner, is 
reached by determining the distance from the source of light at 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 43 

which print of moderate size just ceases to be readable. For this 
purpose the print must be a mixture of letters which do not form 
intelligible words and the point which can be determined most 
accurately is where large letters, as capitals, are still readable, 
while small letters are already unreadable (see p. 174) . Obviously, 
in comparing different colors of light the object must be colorless, 
that is, the print be black on white. This method of comparison 
of the physiological effect, by what has been called the "lumino- 
meter," is theoretically the most correct, as it is independent of 
the color of light. It is, however, not as accurate as the compari- 
son by photometer, and thus the average of a number of observa- 
tions must be used. The only error which this method leaves is 
that due to the difference in the sensitivity of different eyes, that 
is, due to the differences between the sensitivity curves (Fig. 21), 
and this in most cases seems to be very small. 

22. It is found, however, that the sensitivity curve for different 
colors of radiation is a function of the intensity of radiation; that 
is, the maximum sensitivity point of the eye is not at a definite 
frequency or wave length, but varies with the intensity of illumi- 
nation and shifts more towards the red end of the spectrum for 
high, towards the violet end of the spectrum for low intensity of 
illumination, and for illumination of very high intensity the maxi- 
mum physiological effect takes place in the yellow light, while for 
very low intensity of illumination it occurs in the bluish green 
light; that is, at high intensity yellow light requires less power 
for the same physiological effect than any other color of light, 
while for low intensity, bluish green light requires less power for 
the same physiological effect than any other color of light. Thus, 
if an orange yellow light, as a flame carbon arc, and a bluish green 
light, as a mercury lamp, appear of the same intensity from the 
distance of 100 feet, by going nearer to the lamps the orange 
yellow appears to increase more rapidly in intensity than the 
bluish green, and from a very short distance the former appears 
glaring bright, while the latter is disappointing by not showing 
anywhere near the same apparent intensity. Inversely, when 
going further and further away from the two lamps the orange 
yellow light seems to fade out more rapidly than the bluish green, 
and has practically disappeared while the bluish green is still 
markedly visible. A mercury lamp, therefore, can be seen from 
distances from which a much brighter yellow flame arc is practi- 


44 


RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 


cally invisible, but inversely, from a very short distance the 
yellow light appears dazzling, while a mercury lamp of higher 
candle power appears less bright. 

Fig. 23 illustrates the change of sensitivity with intensity, by 
approximate curves of the variation of the relative sensitivity of 
the average human eye with the intensity i of illumination in 


v 


FIG. 23. 

meter candles (or rather log i) as abscissas, for red light, wave 
length 65.0; orange yellow light, wave length 59; bluish green 
light, wave length 50.5; and violet light, wave length 45.0. 

As seen for red light as well as violet light — the two ends of 
the visible spectrum — the sensitivity is low, while for orange 
yellow as well as bluish green light — near the middle of the 
visible range — the sensitivity is high. 

For bluish green light, however, the sensitivity is high at low 
and moderate intensities but falls off for high intensities, while 
for orange yellow light the sensitivity is high at high intensities 
and falls off at medium and low intensities and ultimately vanishes, 
that is, becomes invisible at intensities many times higher than 
those at which green light is still well visible. 

Red light vanishes from visibility still earlier than orange yel- 
low light, while violet light remains visible even at very low 
intensities. 

The vanishing points of the different colors of light, that is, 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 45 

the minimum intensities which can just be perceived are, approxi- 
mately, at: 

Color red orange yellow green blue violet 

Wave length lw = 67 60.5 57.5 50.5 47 . 43 x 10~fl 

Meter-candles in- 
tensity .... i0 = 0.06 0.0056 0.0029 0.00017 0.00012 0.00012 

Relative radiation 

power po = 10,000 1000 100 1 2 20 

That is, the minimum visible amount of green light represents 
the least amount of power; the minimum visible amount of 
blue light requires twice as much power as green light; violet 
light 20 times as much, but yellow light 100 times and red light 
even 10,000 times as much power as green light at the threshold 
of visibility. 

While the intensity of radiation varies inversely proportional 
to the square of the distance, it follows herefrom that the physio- 
logical effect of radiation does not vary exactly with the square 
of the distance, but varies somewhat faster, that is, with a higher 
power of the distance for orange yellow or the long-wave end of 
the spectrum, and somewhat slower, that is, with a lesser power 
of the distance than the square, for bluish green or the short-wave 
end of the spectrum. 

This phenomenon is appreciable even when comparing the 
enclosed alternating carbon arc with the open direct current car- 
bon arc : by photometer, where a fairly high intensity of illumi- 
nation is used, the relative intensity of the two arcs is found 
somewhat different than by luminometer, that is, by reading 
distances nearer the lower limit of visibility. For low intensities, 
the alternating arc compares more favorably than for high 
intensities. 

It follows, therefore, that in the photometric comparison of 
illuminants, where appreciable color differences exist, the inten- 
sity of illumination at which the comparison is made must be 
given, as it influences the result, or the candle power and the 
distance of observation stated. 

23. Not only the sensitivity maximum is different for low and 
for high intensity of illumination, but the shape of the sensi- 
tivity curve also is altered, and for low intensity is more peaked, 
that is, the sensitivity decreases more rapidly from a maximum 
towards the ends- of the spectrum than it does for high intensity 


46 


RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 


of illumination as indicated by the curves in Fig. 24 which 
shows approximate sensitivity curves of the average human eye : 
(a) for every low illumination near the treshold value of visi- 
bility or 0.001 meter-candles; (b) for medium illumination, 4.6 
meter-candles; (c) for very high illumination, 600 meter-candles. 


lu,*-. 1.65 
I = 45.0 


1.70 
50.0 


L 


t 


\ 


\ 


\ 


FIG. 24. 


(1 meter-candle is the illumination produced by 1 candle power 
of light intensity at 1 meter distance; N meter-candles, thus, the 
illumination produced by a light source of N candle power at 1 

meter distance or of 1 candle power at— -= meter distance, etc.). 

VN 

As seen, curve (a) ends at wave length /„, = 61 X 10~fl; that is, 
for longer waves or orange and red light, 0.001 meter-candles is 
below the threshold value of visibility, hence is no longer visible. 

The maximum visibility, that is the sensitivity maximum of 
the human eye, lies at wave length. 

Z0 = 51.1, bluish green for very low intensity, curve (a). 
Z0 = 53.7, yellowish green for medium intensity, curve (b). 
10 = 56.5, yellow for high intensity, curve (c). 

The sensitivity maximum varies with the intensity about as 
shown in Fig. 25; that is, it is constant in the bluish green for 
low intensities, changes at medium intensities in the range be- 
tween 0.5 and 50 meter-candles and again remains constant in 
the yellow for still higher intensities. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 


47 


The sensitivity curves, as given in Fig. 24, have the general 
character of probability curves : 


where lwo is the wave length at maximum sensitivity and HQ is 
the sensitivity at this wave length, that is, the maximum sensi- 
tivity and ks is a constant which is approximately 120 for low, 


LOG 

t= - 

3 

I2 

- 

1 

0 

* 

1 

+ 

a 

4 

3 57 

- 0. 

X)l 

0. 

bi 

0 

i 

1 

1 

1 

^1 

)0 

100 

^x 

ME 

s 

ER-C, 

NDLE 

'/ 

';\ 

V 

/ 

/ 

Sr, 

H=H< 

«•*• 

(j*~ 

i)2 

^s 

>c 

*~- , 

/ 

[gg 

S 

FIG. 25. 

62 for high intensities and changes in approximately the same 
range of intensities in which lwo changes; ks is also plotted in 
Fig. 25. 

This effect of the intensity of illumination on the sensitivity of 
the eye is very important in illuminating engineering as it deter- 
mines the color shades which are most effective for the particular 
purpose. For instance, in sending the light to great distances, 
for signalling, etc., the bluish green of the mercury lamp is best 
suited, carries farthest, and the yellow flame arc the poorest; the 
white carbon arc superior to the yellow flame arc, even where the 
latter is of greater intensity. Inversely, where a big glare of 
light is desired, as for decorative purposes, for advertising, etc., 
the yellow flame carbon arc is best suited, the bluish green mer- 
cury lamp disappointing. 

Apparent exceptions may exist : for instance, the long waves of 
the orange yellow penetrate fog better than the short waves of 
bluish green, and for lighthouses, where the important problem is 
to reach the greatest possible distance in fog, yellow light, thus, 
may be superior. In general, however, the bluish green is superior 


48 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

in visibility to the orange yellow for long distances, and inversely, 
the orange yellow is superior for short distances. 

At the limits of visibility the eye is very many times more 
sensitive to green light and, in general, high-frequency light, than 
to orange yellow and, in general, low-frequency light. 

A necessary result of the higher sensitivity of the eye for green 
light is the preponderance of green in gas and vapor spectra. As 
no special reason exists why spectrum lines should appear more 
frequently at one wave length than at any other and as the radia- 
tion is most visible in the green, this explains, somewhat, the 
tendency of most highly efficient illuminants towards a greenish 
or yellow color (as, for instance, the Welsbach mantel, the Nernst 
lamp, etc.). 

Pathological and Other Effects on the Eye. 

24. Radiation is a form of energy, and thus, when intercepted 
and absorbed, disappears as radiation by conversion into another 
form of energy, usually heat. Thus the light which enters the 
eye is converted into heat, and if its power is considerable it may 
be harmful or even destructive, causing inflammation or burns. 
This harmful effect of excessive radiation is not incident to any 
particular frequency, but inherent in radiation as a form of 
energy. It is, therefore, greatest for the same physiological effect, 
that is, the same amount of visibility, for those frequencies of 
light which have the lowest visibility or highest power equiva- 
lent, that is, for the red and the violet and least for the green and 
the yellow, which for the same amount of visibility represent 
least power. Hence, green and greenish yellow light are the most 
harmless, the least irritating to the eye, as they represent the 
least power. We feel this effect and express it by speaking of 
the green light as "cold light" and of the red and orange light as 
"hot" or "warm." The harmful effect of working very much 
under artificial illumination is largely due to this energy effect, 
incident to the large amount of orange, red, and especially ultra- 
red in the radiation of the incandescent bodies used for illumi- 
nants and thus does not exist with "cold light," as the light of 
the mercury lamp. 

Blue and violet light, however, are just as energetic, or "hot," 
as orange and red light, and the reason that they are usually not 
recognized as such is that we have no means to produce efficiently 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 


49 


powerful blue and violet light, and if we could produce it would 
not be able to use it for illumination, due to the specific effects of 
this light which will be described in the following. 

If, in Fig. 26, the curve A represents roughly the mechanical 
power equivalent of light for average intensity, that is, the power 
required to produce the same physiological effect or the same 
candle power, the distribution of power in an incandescent lamp 


YELLOW GREEN 

FIG. 26. 


carbon filament would be somewhat like C. That is, the physio- 
logical effect falls off somewhat towards the green, as C drops 
more than A, and almost vanishes in the blue and violet, as C 
rapidly decreases, while A, the power required to give the same 
physiological effect, rapidly increases. From the yellow towards 
the red the physiological effect again decreases somewhat, but 


50 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

the radiation still increases towards the ultra-red. Dividing C 
by A then gives the distribution of the physiological effect, curve 
C', that is, of visibility, in the incandescent lamp spectrum, show- 
ing that the color of the light is yellow. Hg gives the distribu- 
tion of power in the mercury spectrum. It is shown in dotted 
lines, as the distribution is not continuous, but the power massed 
at definite points, the spectrum lines of mercury. Hg' then gives 
the visibility curve by dividing Hg by A. As seen, the ratio of 
the area of Hg* to Hg, that is, the ratio of the physiological effect 
to the power, is much less than the ratio of the area of C' to C; 
that is, the former produces for the same amount of visibility far 
less heat and thus is safer. 

25. Excessive intensity, such as produced at a short-circuiting 
arc, is harmful to the eye. The human organism has by evolu- 
tion, by natural selection, developed a protective mechanism 
against the entrance of radiation of excessive power into the eye : 
at high intensity of illumination the pupil of the eye contracts 
and thus reduces the amount of light admitted, and a sudden 
exposure to excessive radiation causes the eyelids to close. This 
protective mechanism is automatic; it is, however, responsive 
mainly to long waves of radiation, to the red and the yellow light, 
but not to the short waves of green, blue and violet light. The 
reason for this is apparently that all sources of excessive radia- 
tion which are found in nature, the sun and the fire, are rich in 
red and yellow rays, but frequently poor in rays of short wave 
length, and, therefore, a response to short wave lengths alone would 
not be sufficient for protection as they might be absent in many 
intense radiations, while a response to long waves would be 
sufficient since these are always plentiful in the intense radiations 
found in nature. 

It is only of late years that illuminants, as the mercury lamp, 
which are deficient in the long waves, have been produced, and for 
these the protective action of the eye, by contracting the pupil, 
fails. This absence or reduction of the contraction of the pupil 
of the eye in the light of the mercury lamp is noticed when passing 
from a room well illuminated by incandescent lamps, to one equally 
well illuminated by mercury lamps and inversely. When changing 
from the incandescent light to the mercury light, the illumination 
given by the latter at first appears dull and inferior as the pupil 
is still contracted, but gradually gains in intensity as the pupil 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 51 

opens; and inversely, coming from the mercury light to the incan- 
descent light, the latter first appears as a big glare of light, the 
pupil still being open, but gradually dulls down by the contraction 
of the pupil. 

This absence of the automatic protective action of the eye 
against light deficient in long waves is very important, as it means 
that exposure to excessive intensity of illumination by mercury 
light may be harmful, due to the power of the light, against which 
the eye fails to protect, while the same or even greater power of 
radiation in yellow light would be harmless, as the eye will pro- 
tect itself against it. The mercury lamp, therefore, is the safest 
illuminant, when of that moderate intensity required for good 
illumination, but becomes harmful when of excessive intensity, as 
when closely looking at the lamp for considerable time, when 
operating at excessive current. The possibility of a harmful 
effect is noticed by the light appearing as glaring. This phe- 
nomenon explains the contradictory statements occasionally made 
regarding the physiological effect of such illuminants. 

26. Up to and including the green light, no specific effects, 
that is, effects besides those due to the power of radiation, seem 
yet to exist. They begin, however, at the wave length of blue 
light. 

I show you here a fairly intense blue violet light, that is, light 
containing only blue and violet radiation. It is derived from a 
vertical mercury lamp, which is surrounded by two concentric 
glass cylinders welded together at the bottom. The space be- 
tween the cylinders is filled with a fairly concentrated solution 
of potassium permanganate (strong copper nitrate solution or a 
cupric-ammon salt solution, though not quite so good may also 
be used) which is opaque to all but the blue and violet radiations. 
As you see, the light has a very weird and uncanny effect, is 
extremely irritating: you can see by it as the intensity of illumi- 
nation is fairly high, but you cannot distinguish everything, and 
especially the lamp is indefinite and hazy : you see it, but when 
you look at it it disappears, and thus your eye is constantly try- 
ing to look at it and still never succeeds, which produces an 
irritating restlessness. It can well be believed that long exposure 
to such illumination would result in insanity. The cause of this 
weird effect — which is difficult to describe — is that the sensitive 
spot on the retina, that is, the point on which we focus the image 


52 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

of the object which we desire to see, or the fova F in Fig. 19, is 
blue blind, that is, does not see the blue or violet light. Thus we 
see the lamp and other objects indistinctly on the outer range of 
the retina, but what we try to see distinctly disappears when 
focused on the blue blind spot F. This spot, therefore, is often 
called the " yellow spot," as we see yellow on it — due to the 
absence of the vision of blue at this particular place of the retina. 

To produce this effect requires the mercury lamp; most other 
illuminants do not have sufficient blue and violet rays to give 
considerable illumination of this color and even if they do, no 
screen which passes blue and violet is sufficiently opaque to the 
long waves not to pass enough of them to spoil the effect, if the 
illuminant is rich in such long waves. The mercury lamp, how- 
ever, is deficient in these, and thus it is necessary only to blind off 
the green and yellow rays in order to get the blue and violet light. 

I show you here a mercury lamp enclosed by a screen consist- 
ing of a solution of naphtol green (an aniline dye) which transmits 
only the green light. As you see, in the green the above-described 
effect does not exist, but the vision is clear, distinct and restful. 

27. Beyond the violet the radiation is no longer visible to the 
eye as light. There is, however, a faint perception of ultra-violet 
light in the eye, not as distinct light, but rather as an indis- 
tinct, uncomfortable feeling, some form of dull pain, possibly 
resulting from fluorescence effects caused by the ultra-violet 
radiation inside of the eye. With some practice the presence of 
ultra-violet radiation thus can be noticed by the eye and such 
light avoided. In the ultra-violet, and possibly to a very slight 
extent in the violet and even in the blue, a specific harmful effect 
appears, which probably is of chemical nature, a destruction by 
chemical dissociation. This effect increases in severity the 
further we reach into the ultra-violet, and probably becomes a 
maximum in the range from one to two octaves beyond the violet. 
These very short ultra-violet rays are extremely destructive to 
the eye : exposure even to a moderate intensity of them for very 
few minutes produces a severe and painful inflammation, the 
after effects of which last for years, and long exposures would 
probably result in blindness. The chronic effects of this inflam- 
mation are similar to the effect observed in blue light : inability 
or difficulty in fixing objects on the sensitive spot F, so that with- 
out impairment of the vision on the rest of the retina clear dis- 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 53 

tinction is impaired and reading becomes difficult or impossible, 
especially in artificial illumination. It appears as if the sensitive 
spot F, or the focusing mechanism of the eye, were over-irritated 
and when used, for instance in reading, becomes very rapidly 
fatigued and the vision begins to blur. If further irritation by 
ultra-violet light or by attempting to read, etc., is avoided, 
gradually the rapidity of fatigue decreases, the vision remains 
distinct for a longer and longer time before it begins to blur and 
ultimately becomes normal again. 

The inflammation of the eye produced by ultra-violet light 
appears to be different from that caused by exposure to high- 
power radiation of no specific effect, as the light of a short circuit 
of a high-power electric system, or an explosion, etc. 

The main differences are: 

1. The effect of high-power radiation (power burn) appears 
immediately after exposure, while that of ultra-violet radiation 
(ultra-violet burn) appears from 6 to 18 hours after exposure. 

2. The external symptoms of inflammation: redness of the 
eyes and the face, swelling, copious tears, etc., are pronounced 
in the power burn, but very moderate or even entirely absent 
in the ultra-violet burn. 

3. Complete recovery from a power burn even in severe cases 
usually occurs within a few days, leaving no after effects, while 
recovery from an ultra-violet burn is extremely slow, taking 
months or years, and some after effects, as abnormal sensitivity 
to radiation of short wave lengths, may be practically permanent. 

The general phenomena of a severe power burn are : 

Temporary blindness immediately after exposure, severe pains 
in the eyes and the face, redness of eyes and face, swelling, copi- 
ous tears, etc. These effects increase for a few hours and then 
decrease, yielding readily to proper treatment: application of 
ice, cold boric acid solution, etc., and complete recovery occurs 
within a few days. 

In chronic cases, as excessive work under artificial illumination, 
the symptoms appear gradually, but recovery, if no structural 
changes in the eyes have occurred, is rapid and complete by 
proper treatment and discontinuance of work under artificial 
illumination. 

Most artificial light is given by temperature radiation (incan- 
descent lamp, gas and kerosene flame), and therefore its radiation 


54 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

consists of a very small percentage only of visible light (usually 
less than 1 per cent), while most of its energy is in the ultra-red 
and invisible, and for the same amount of visible radiation or 
light the total radiated power thus is many times greater than 
with daylight. Regarding chronic " power burn," artificial light, 
therefore, is much more harmful than daylight, that is, much 
more energy enters the eye under incandescent illumination than 
under much more powerful daylight illumination. 

In a severe ultra-violet burn no immediate symptoms are 
noticeable, except that the light may appear uncomfortable 
while looking at it. The onset of the symptoms is from 6 to 18 
hours later, that is, usually during the night following the ex- 
posure, by severe deep-seated pains in the eyes; the external 
appearance of inflammation is moderate or absent, the vision is 
not impaired, but distinction made difficult by the inability to 
focus the eye on any object. The pains in the eyes and head- 
ache yield very slowly; for weeks and even months any attempt 
of the patient to use the eyes for reading, or otherwise sharply 
distinguishing objects, leads to blurring of the vision; the letters 
of the print seem to run around and the eye cannot hold on 
to them, and severe headache and deep-seated pains in the 
eyes follow such attempt. Gradually these effects become less; 
after some months reading for a moderate length of time during 
daylight is possible, but when continued too long, or in poor 
light, as in artificial illumination, leads to blurring of the vision 
and head or eye ache. Practically complete recovery occurs 
only after some years, and even then some care is necessary, as 
any very severe and extended strain on the eyes temporarily 
brings back the symptoms. Especially is this the case when 
looking at a light of short wave length, as the mercury arc; that 
is, there remains an abnormal sensitivity of the eye to light of 
short wave lengths, even such light which to the normal eye is 
perfectly harmless, as the mercury lamp. 

In chronic cases of ultra-violet burn, which may occur when 
working on unprotected arcs, and especially spark discharges 
(as in wireless telegraphy), the first symptoms are: occasional 
headaches, located back of the eyes, that is, pains which may 
be characterized either as headache or as deep-seated eye ache. 
These recur with increasing frequency and severity. At the 
same time the blurring of the vision begins to be noticeable 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 55 

and the patient finds it more and more difficult to keep the eye 
focused for any length of time on objects, as the print when read- 
ing. These symptoms increase m severity until the patient 
is obliged to give up the occupation which exposed him to ultra- 
violet light, and then gradual recovery occurs, as described above, 
if the damage has not progressed too far. 

In mild cases recovery from power burns may occur in a few 
hours and complete recovery from mild ultra-violet burns in 
a few weeks. 

Both types of burn may occasionally occur simultaneously 
and their symptoms then successively. 

For instance, in a case of an exposure while working for about 
half an hour with a flame-carbon arc without enclosing glass 
globe (such an arc contains large amounts of high-power radia- 
tion, of yellow and orange color, but also a considerable amount 
of ultra-violet rays), the symptoms of the power burn increased 
in severity for a few hours, and then rapidly vanished by the 
application of cold water, and recovery was practically complete 
six hours after exposure; then some hours later, in the middle 
of the night, the patient was awakened by severe pains in the 
eyes, the symptoms of the ultra-violet burn, and had to seek 
medical attendance. Under proper treatment recovery occurred 
in a few days, but the blurring of the vision was appreciable 
for some days longer, and the sensitivity to high-frequency light 
for some weeks. 

28. Arcs produce considerable amount of ultra-violet light,* 
and in former experiments we have used a high frequency iron 
arc for producing ultra-violet light and also have seen that even a 
very thin sheet of glass is opaque for these radiations. For very 
long ultra-violet rays, that is, the range close to the visible violet, 
glass is not quite opaque, but becomes perfectly opaque for about 
one-quarter to one-half octave beyond the violet, and in this first 
quarter of an octave the harmful effect of the ultra-violet radia- 
tion is still very small and becomes serious only when approach- 
ing a distance of about one octave from the visible end of the 
violet. Clear transparent glass thus offers a practically complete 
protection against the harmful effects of ultra-violet light, except 
when the latter is of excessive intensity, and thus arcs enclosed 

* An arc between silicon terminals emits especially powerful ultra-violet 
radiation accompanied by little visible light. 


56 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

by glass globes are harmless. It is, however, not safe to look 
into and work in the light of open metal arcs for too long a 
time. 

The carbon arc gives the least ultra-violet rays, so little that 
even without enclosure by glass it is fairly safe; metal arcs give 
more and the mercury arc gives the greatest amount and reaches 
to the farthest distance beyond the visible, and these very destruc- 
tive very short ultra-violet rays have so far only been observed in 
the radiation of a low temperature mercury arc in a quartz tube : 
quartz being transparent to these rays while glass is opaque. 
The high temperature mercury arc in a quartz tube, that is, arc 
operated near atmospheric pressure as it is used to some extent 
for illumination, especially abroad, seems to be much less dan- 
gerous than the low temperature or vacuum arc, but it also 
requires a protecting glass globe. 

In general, no metal arc, spark discharge, or glow discharge 
should ever be used industrially or otherwise without being en- 
closed by a glass globe, preferably of lead glass, if located so that 
it may be looked at. Those experimenting with arcs or other 
electric discharges should always protect their eyes by the inter- 
position of a glass plate. 

Thus the sparks of wireless telegraph stations, the discharges 
of ozonizers, the arcs of nitric acid generators, electric furnaces, 
etc., may be dangerous without glass enclosure. 

While artificial illuminants, and especially metal arcs, give 
an appreciable amount of ultra-violet light, these ultra-violet 
rays extend only to about one-quarter octave beyond the visible 
violet and if, as is always the case, the illuminant is enclosed by 
glass, the harmful effect of these long ultra-violet rays is negli- 
gible. The radiation of the sun also contains ultra-violet rays, 
and a larger percentage compared with the total radiation than 
any glass-enclosed artificial illuminant, and as the light of the sun, 
that is, daylight, is recognized as perfectly harmless, as far as 
this specific destructive action is concerned, the same applies to 
the artificial illuminants, as they contain less ultra-violet rays 
than the light of the sun. 

This specific destructive action on the eye of short ultra-violet 
radiation extends beyond the blank space in the spectrum of 
radiation (Fig. 14) and still exists, though possibly to a lesser 
extent, in the X-rays. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 57 

Pathological and Therapeutic Effects of Radiation. 

29. Radiation impinging on the tissue of the human body 
or other living organisms exerts an influence depending on 
intensity, power and frequency. The effect on the eye has been 
discussed in the preceding paragraphs. The specific chemical 
effect in supplying the energy of plant life will be more fully 
discussed in the following under chemical effects. As is to be 
expected, the effect of radiation on the living protoplasm 
of the cells is stimulating if of moderate intensity, destructive 
if of excessive intensity; that is, by the energy of the radiation 
the motions of the parts of the protoplasm-molecule are in- 
creased, and, if the intensity of radiation is too high, the mole- 
cule thus is torn asunder, that is, destroyed, the living cell 
killed and inflammation and necrosis (mortification) result. 
If the intensity is moderate, merely an increase of the rapidity 
of the chemical changes in the protoplasm, which we call life, 
results; that is, the radiation exerts a stimulating effect, in- 
creasing the intensity of life, causing an increased renewal of 
worn-out tissue and reconstruction, and thus is beneficial or 
curative, especially where the metabolism is sluggish. 

Just as in the action on the eye, two different effects probably 
exist : a general effect due to the energy of the radiation — which 
with sunlight is a maximum beyond the visible close to the red 
end of the spectrum, and with most artificial illuminants (those 
based on incandescence) reaches a maximum still further in 
the ultra-red — and a specific effect depending on the frequency. 

The power effect is general and probably fairly uniform 
throughout the exposed tissue, appears simultaneous with or 
immediately after the exposure, and thus practically no danger 
of harmful results from destruction of tissue exists, as excessive 
intensity makes itself felt immediately, before far-going destruc- 
tion of tissue can occur, and, therefore, the only possible danger 
which could exist would be in the indirect effect of stimulation 
on other organs of the body, as the heart. Thus the use of in- 
candescent light as stimulant appears fairly harmless. 

Different is the specific action of high-frequency radiation. 
This occurs only some time after exposure, from a few hours to 
several weeks (with X-rays) . As these higher frequencies are not 
felt by the body as such and exert a powerful action even at such 


58 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

low intensities that their energy is not felt as heat, and, further- 
more, . the susceptibility of different people may be different, 
there is nothing to guard against excessive and thereby harmful 
exposure. Furthermore, the damage is far more severe and 
lasting than with the power effect, and fatal cases have occurred 
years after exposure. Possibly, as may be expected from 
selective action, only a few cells in the living tissue are killed 
by the radiation, and the disintegration products of these dead 
cells then gradually involve the surrounding living cells, causing 
their destruction or degeneration, so that the harm is far out of 
proportion with the immediate destructive effect of the radia- 
tion proper, especially with penetrating forms of radiation, as 
X-rays and radium rays, in which the lesions are correspondingly 
deep-seated. 

High-frequency radiation (violet, ultra-violet, X-ray) should 
therefore be used only under the direction of experts fully 
familiar with their physiological action and danger. 

The specific action of high-frequency radiation is still absent 
in the green, begins slightly in the blue and violet, increases 
into the ultra-violet and persists up to the highest frequencies of 
the X-rays. It is shared also by the radiation of the radio-active 
substances, as the alpha and beta rays of radium. While the 
maximum of this effect probably also lies in the ultra-violet, 
from one to two octaves beyond the visible spectrum, the 
effect is profoundly modified by the transparency or opacity of 
the tissue for different frequencies, and the character of the stimu- 
lating and pathological effects greatly depends on the depth to 
which the radiation penetrates the body. 

The largest part of the organism is water. Water is trans- 
parent for visible light, becomes more and more opaque in the 
ultra-red as well as in the ultra-violet, and is again fairly trans- 
parent for X-rays. Blood is fairly transparent for the long 
visible rays of red and yellow, but nearly opaque for the shorter 
violet and ultra-violet rays. Hence next to the X-rays which 
can pass through the body, the longest visible rays of red and 
yellow penetrate relatively deepest into the body, though even 
they are practically absorbed within a short distance from the 
surface. Thus while the energy maximum of the sunlight 
is in the ultra-red, the maximum physiological effect probably 
is that of the red and yellow rays : the same which are the active 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 59 

rays in plant life. The violet and ultra-violet rays are absorbed 
close to the surface of the body by the blood, which is opaque 
for them. They can thus be made to penetrate deeper — as is 
done in their therapeutic use — by freeing the tissue of the body 
from blood by compression or other means. Even then, how- 
ever, probably only the longest ultra-violet rays penetrate, the 
very short ones being kept out by the opaque character of the 
water in the tissue. 

The penetration of the radiation of the sunlight into the human 
body is very greatly reduced by acclimatization, which leads 
to the formation of a protective layer or pigment, more or less 
opaque to the light. Such acclimatization may be permanent 
or temporary. Permanent acclimatization has been evolved 
during ages by those races which developed in tropical regions, 
as the negroes. They are protected by a black pigment under 
the skin, and thereby can stand intensities of solar radiation 
which would be fatal to white men. A temporary acclimatiza- 
tion results from intermittent exposure to sunlight for gradually 
increasing periods : tanning, and enables the protected to stand 
without harmful effects exposure to sunlight which would pro- 
duce severe sunburn in the unprotected. This acquired protec- 
tion mostly wears off in a few weeks, but some traces remain 
even after years. 

A slight protection by pigmentation also exists in white men, 
and its differences lead to the observed great differences in sensi- 
tivity to solar radiation: blondes, who usually have very light 
pigmentation, are more susceptible to sunburn and sunstroke than 
the more highly pigmented brunette people. 

In sunburn we probably have two separate effects super- 
imposed upon the other: that due to the energy of the solar 
radiation and the specific effect of the high frequencies, which 
to a small extent are contained in the sunlight. The two effects 
are probably somewhat different, and the high-frequency effect 
tends more to cause inflammation of the tissue, while the energy 
effect tends towards the production of pigmentation (tanning), 
and the symptoms of sunburn thus vary with the different pro- 
portions of energy radiation and of high-frequency radiation as 
depending on altitude, humidity of the air, the season, etc. 

30. The action of radiation on living organisms is stimulating 
if of moderate intensity, destructive if of high intensity. Thus 


60 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

it is analogous with that of any other powerful agent or drug, 
as alcohol, caffeine, etc. The intensity of light which is destruc- 
tive to life largely depends on the amount of light to which the 
organism is accustomed. Those organisms which live in the 
dark may be killed by an amount of light which is necessary 
for the life of other organisms. Amongst the saprophytic bacilli, 
for instance (the germs of putrefaction), many species live in the 
light, and die, or at least do not multiply, if brought into the 
dark, while other putrefactive bacilli live in the dark and are 
killed by light. The latter also is the case with the pathogenic 
bacilli, that is, the disease germs, as the bacillus of tuberculosis, 
cholera, etc. As these live in the dark, the interior of the body, 
they are rapidly killed by light. Light, and radiation in general, 
therefore is one of the most powerful germicides and disinfect- 
ants. One of the most effective prophylactic measures, espe- 
cially against the diseases of civilization, as tuberculosis, etc., thus 
is to flood our homes with light, especially direct sunlight, while 
our habit of keeping the light out of our houses by curtains, 
shades, etc., closing our residences almost light-tight, when 
leaving them for some time, converts them into breeding places 
of disease germs, and then we wonder about mortality. 

Obviously excessive light intensity ultimately becomes harm- 
ful even to the human organism, and it is therefore advisable 
to protect ourselves against the light when it becomes annoying 
by its intensity. It has even been claimed that the impossibility 
of white men to become permanently acclimatized in the tropics 
and the change in the temperament of the population of our 
country within a few generations from their immigration: 
the increased nervousness, restlessness and "strenuousness," 
are the result of the greater intensity of the sunlight, especially 
its high-frequency radiation, compared with the more cloudy 
climate of our original European home. Whether this is the 
case remains to be further investigated. It is hard to believe, 
however, that such a profound effect should result from the 
exposure of a small part of the body, face and hands, to a more 
intense light, and the failure of acclimatization in the tropics 
could well be explained by the higher temperature and its damag- 
ing effect, while the change from Europe to America is not merely 
a change from a more cloudy to a more sunny climate, but 
from a maritime climate, that is, climate having fairly uniform 


PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 61 

and slowly changing temperatures, to a continental climate, 
with its rapid changes of temperature and enormous temperature 
extremes, and the difference between continental and maritime 
climate may be suspected as the cause in the change of the tem- 
perament of the races. 

As men have lived for ages in the light, the cells of the human 
body are far more resisting to the light than the disease germs, 
which for ages have lived in the dark; and light, and more 
particularly the high-frequency violet and ultra-violet radiation 
and the X-rays, thus have found a useful therapeutic application 
in killing disease germs in the human body. Thus, by expos- 
ing the diseased tissue to high-frequency radiation, the disease 
germs are killed, or so far damaged that the body can destroy 
them, while the cells of the body are still unharmed, but stimu- 
lated to greater activity in combating the disease germs. As 
seen, for this purpose the radiation must be of sufficient intensity 
and duration to kill or damage the bacilli, but not so intense 
as to harm the cells of the body. Surface infections, as tubercu- 
losis of the skin (scrofulosis, lupus), thus are effectively and 
rapidly cured by high-frequency light. More difficult and less 
certain the effect is if the infection is deeper seated, as then 
the radiation must penetrate a greater thickness of tissue to 
reach the bacilli, and is thereby largely absorbed, and the danger 
thus exists that, before a sufficient intensity of radiation can be 
brought to the seat of the infection, the intensity at the surface 
of the tissue may become harmful to the cells of the body. In 
this case the more penetrating X-rays would be more applicable, 
as they can penetrate to any depth into the body. They are, 
however, so far distant in frequency from the light radiation, 
that the acclimatization of the body to the light radiation 
probably exists only to a lesser extent against the X-rays; that 
is, the difference in the destructive effect on the bacilli and on 
the cells of the body, on which the curative effect is based, prob- 
ably is less with the X-rays than with the long ultra-violet waves. 

Since Dr. Finsen introduced phototherapy and radiotherapy, 
about fifteen years ago, it thus has found a very extended and 
useful field, within its limitation. 

This greater destructive action of radiation on micro-organisms 
than on the cells of the human body, extends not merely to the 
pathogenic bacilli, but to all organisms living in the dark. 


62 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

Thus the spermatozoa — which biologically are independent 
living organisms — seem to be killed by X-rays before any 
damage is done to the body, and permanent sterility then 
results. Amongst the cells of the body differences seem to exist 
in their resistivity. It is claimed, for instance, that the sensory- 
nerves are first paralyzed by violet radiation and that intense 
violet light can thus be used to produce local anaesthesia, suf- 
ficient for minor operations. 

Occasionally the effect of light may be harmful in the relation 
of the human body to invading bacilli. In some eruptive in- 
fections, as smallpox, ulceration of the skin (leading to mark- 
ing) seems to be avoided if the patient is kept from the light, 
and the course of the disease mitigated. As red light, however, 
seems to have no effect, instead of perfect exclusion of light, 
which is not very feasible, the use of red light thus seems to offer 
an essential advantage.
