LECTURE XII. 
ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 

110. Artificial light is used for the purpose of seeing and 
distinguishing objects clearly and comfortably when the day- 
light fails. The problem of artificial lighting thus comprises con- 
sideration of the source of light or the illuminant; the flux of 
light issuing from it; the distribution of the light flux in space, 
that is, the light flux density in space and more particularly at 
the illuminated objects; the illumination, that is, the light flux 
density reflected from the illuminated objects, and the effect 
produced thereby on the human eye. In the latter, we have left 
the field of physics and entered the realm of physiology, which is 
not as amenable to exact experimental determination, and where 
our knowledge thus is far more limited than in physical science. 
This then constitutes one of the main difficulties of the art of 
illuminating engineering: that it embraces the field of two dif- 
ferent sciences — physics and physiology. 

The light flux entering the eye is varied in its physical quantity 
by the reaction of the eye on light flux density in contracting 
or expanding the pupil. The effect of the light flux which enters 
the eye is varied by the fatigue, which depends on intensity and 
also on color. Distinction is due to differences in the light flux 
density from the illuminated objects, that is, differences of 
illumination, which may be differences in quality, that is, in 
color, or differences in intensity, that is, in brightness, and as 
such includes the effect of shadows as causing differences in 
intensity at the edge of objects. 

The physical quantities with which we have to deal in illumi- 
nating engineering thus are : 

The intensity of the light source or the illuminant, and its 
brilliancy, that is, the flux density at the surface of the 
illuminant; 

The flux of light, that is, the total visible radiation issuing 
from the illuminant; 

256 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 257 

The light flux density, that is, the distribution of the light flux 
in space, and 

The illumination, that is, the light flux density issuing from 
the illuminated objects. 

The intensity of a light source is measured in candles. The unit 
of light intensity, or the candle, is a quantity not directly related 
to the absolute system of units, but reproduced from specifica- 
tions or by comparison with maintained standards, and for 
white light is probably between 0.04 and 0.02 watt. Intensity 
has a meaning only for a point source of light; that is, an illumi- 
nant in which the flux of light issues from a point or such a small 
area that, at the distance considered, it can be considered as a 
point. " Intensity of light " thus is a physical quantity of the 
same nature as " intensity of magnet pole," which latter also 
presupposes that the total magnetic flux issues from a point, 
and thus is applicable only when dealing with such distances 
from the source of the light flux or magnetic flux, that the flux 
can be assumed as issuing from a point. Frequently the inten- 
sity of a light source is different in different directions, and then 
either the distribution curve of the light intensity is required for 
characterizing the illuminant, or the average of the intensities in 
all directions in space is used, and is called the "mean spherical 
intensity." 

The unit of light intensity, or the candle, is the intensity 
which produces unit flux density at unit distance from the light 
source, and thus produces a total flux of light equal to 4 n 
units (the surface of the sphere at unit distance from the light 
source). The unit of light flux is called the lumen, and one 
candle of light intensity thus produces 4 n lumens of light flux 
(just as a magnet pole of unit intensity produces 4 x lines of 
magnetic force). 

The light flux is the essential quantity which characterizes 
the usefulness of an illuminant, and it is the raw material from 
which all illuminating engineering starts. Any source of light 
can be measured in units of light flux or lumens — the diffused 
daylight entering the windows of a room, or the visible radia- 
tion of the mercury lamp or a Moore tube as well as that of a 
point source — by adding all the flux densities intercepted by 
any surface enclosing the source of light. 

In a point source of light, the intensity, in candles, is the total 


258 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

flux of light, in lumens, divided by 4 x. In any illuminant 
which is not a point source, we cannot speak of an intensity, 
except at such distances at which the source of light can be 
assumed as a point; and in interior illumination this is rarely 
the case. Since, however, the candle power, as measure of the 
intensity of light, has become the most familiar quantity in 
characterizing illuminants, very commonly even sources of light 
which are not point sources — as a Moore tube or the diffused 
daylight — are expressed in " equivalent candle power" and when 
thus speaking of the candle power of a mercury lamp, or of the 
diffused daylight from the windows, we mean the candle power 
of a point source of light, which would give the same total flux 
of light as the mercury lamp, or the daylight from the windows, 
etc. The " equivalent candle power," or frequently merely called 
" mean spherical candle power/' thus is the total light flux divided 
by 4 TT, hence in reality is not a unit of intensity, but a unit of 
light flux. 

This explains the apparent contradiction between the claims 
that sources of light, as the mercury lamp or the Moore tube, can- 
not be expressed in candle powers, while at the same time their 
specific consumptions are given in candle power per watt : mean- 
ing equivalent candle power, which refers to the total flux of 
light, and thus is a definite and measurable physical quantity. 

While it is not probable that the custom of rating illuminants 
in candles, regardless of their shape, will quickly disappear, and 
no objection exists against it, provided that it is understood to 
mean the equivalent candle power, it is preferable to use the cor- 
rect unit of light flux, and express the output of a source of light 
in lumens, adding where necessary the equivalent candle power 
in parenthesis. Obviously, the use of the candle power in any 
particular direction — horizontal, or terminal, or maximum can- 
dle power — has a meaning only in characterizing the distribution 
of the light flux, as applicable for a particular purpose, as street 
lighting, but, when used for rating the illuminant by its light flux 
output, is an intentional or unintentional deception. Incandes- 
cent lamps have been rated, and to some extent still are, in hori- 
zontal candle power, but in this case the horizontal candle power 
has ceased to mean the actual horizontal candle power, but is 
the horizontal candle power which with a certain standard dis- 
tribution of light flux would correspond to the light flux of the 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 259 

lamp, and thus also is merely a practical measure of the light 
flux, retained by convenience : one horizontal candle power rep- 
resents 0.78 mean spherical or equivalent candle power of the 
standard distribution curve, and thus 4 TT X 0.78 lumen. 

In general, intensity, or candle power, thus is an angular 
measure, useful in characterizing the distribution of the light 
flux, but not the total light flux. 

111. Light- flux density is the light flux per unit area traversed 
by it, thus is measured in lumens per square meter (or square 
foot), just as the magnetic density is measured in lines of mag- 
netic force per square centimeter. In illumination, as unit of 
length, usually the meter is employed, and not the centimeter, as 
in the absolute system of units, and 102 thus is the reduction 
factor to absolute units. Frequently also the foot is used as 
practical unit of length. 

For a point source of light the light flux density is the inten- 
sity of the light source, in candles (in the direction towards the 
point of observation, if the distribution is not uniform in all 
directions), divided by the square of the distance, in meters, 
or feet, and the light flux density thus is frequently expressed 
in meter-candles, or foot-candles. Thus at 10 feet distance from 
a 16 candle power lamp, the light flux density is 0.16 foot-candle, 
or 0.16 lumen per square foot. Very commonly, therefore, 
the light flux density produced by sources of light which are 
not points, is also expressed in meter-candles or foot-candles — 
which numerically is the same value, that is, the same quantity, 
as lumens per square meter or square foot, but physically 
would refer to the equivalent candle power of the light source. 

Illumination is the light flux density reflected from the illu- 
minated object, and as flux density thus is measured also in 
lumens per square meter or square foot, or in meter-candles or 
foot-candles. 

Brilliancy is the light flux density at the surface of the illumi- 
nant, and as flux density thus could also be measured in lumens 
per square meter or square foot, but, as this would usually give 
enormous values, brilliancy of the light source generally is meas- 
ured in lumens per square centimeter, or per square millimeter. 
It is a quantity which is of high importance mainly in its physio- 
logical effect. 

Light intensity, brilliancy and light flux thus are character- 


260 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

istics of the illuminant, while flux density is a function of the 
space traversed by the light flux, but not of the source of light : 
with the same source of light, in the space from the surface of 
the illuminant to infinite distance, all light flux densities exist 
between the maximum at the surface of the illuminant (its 
brilliancy) and zero. Brilliancy thus is the maximum of the 
light-flux density. While intensity and brilliancy depend upon 
the shape of the illuminant, light flux is independent thereof. 
Illumination is a quantity which depends not only on the source 
of light, that is, light flux and flux density, but also on the illumi- 
nated objects and their nature, and thus is the light flux density 
as modified by the illuminated objects. Very commonly, how- 
ever, the term " illumination " is used to denote " light flux 
density," irrespective of the illuminated objects. 

112. The light flux thus is the raw material with which 
illuminating engineering starts, and the first problem then is 
to distribute the light flux through space so as to give at all 
points the light flux density required for satisfactory illumi- 
nation. 

Some problems, as the lighting of a meeting place, school- 
room, etc., require a uniform or general, and fairly high intensity 
of illumination, while in street lighting a uniform but fairly low 
intensity of illumination is desirable. In other cases, mainly a 
local or concentrated illumination is needed. Usually, however, 
a combination of a local or concentrated illumination, of fairly 
high intensity, with a general illumination of lower intensity, 
is required: the former at those places where we desire to 
distinguish details, as where work is being done, at the reading- 
table, work bench, dining-table etc., while the general illumina- 
tion is merely for orientation in the space, and thus may be of 
lower intensity, and for reasons of economy, and also physio- 
logical reasons, should be of lower intensity. 

We thus have to distinguish between local or concentrated, 
and general or uniform, illumination, and a combination of 
both, and have to distribute the light flux in accordance there- 
with, that is, produce a high flux density at the points or areas 
requiring high concentrated illumination, a low and uniform 
flux density throughout the remaining space. 

This can be done by choosing a light source of the proper 
distribution curve, as, for instance, in street illumination a lamp 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 261 

giving most of the light flux between the horizontal and 20 deg. 
below the horizontal; in many cases of indoor illumination 
a light source giving most of the light between the vertical 
and an angle of from 30 to 60 deg. from the vertical — depending 
on the diameter of the area of concentrated illumination and 
the height of the illuminant above it. It can also be done by 
modifying or directing the light flux of the illuminant by reflec- 
tion or diffraction and diffusion, either from walls and ceilings 
of the illuminated area, or by attachments to the illuminant, 
as reflectors, diffusing globes, diffracting shades, etc. Further- 
more, the required flux distribution can be secured by the use 
of a number of illuminants, and with a larger area this usually 
is necessary. Frequently the desired flux distribution is pro- 
duced by using an illuminant giving more light flux than neces- 
sary, and destroying the excess of flux in those directions where 
it is not wanted, by absorption. Obviously this arrangement 
is uneconomical and thus bad illuminating engineering; the 
desired flux distribution should be secured economically, that 
is, without unnecessary waste of light flux by absorption, and 
this usually can be done by a combination of a number of light 
sources of suitable distribution curves. The most economical 
method of securing the desired distribution curve obviously is 
to choose a light source coming as near to it as possible, and 
then modifying it by reflection or diffraction. 

113. Thus far, the problem is one of physics, and the result, 
that is, the objective illumination, can be measured by photometer 
or luminometer, and thus checked. The duty of the illuminat- 
ing engineer, however, does not end here, but with the same 
objective illumination, that is, the same distribution of light 
flux throughout the entire illuminated area, as measured by 
photometer, the illumination may be very satisfactory, or it 
may be entirely unsatisfactory, depending on whether the physio- 
logical requirements are satisfied or are violated ; and very often 
we find illuminations which seem entirely unsatisfactory, tiring, 
or uncomfortable, but when judged by the density and the 
distribution of the light flux, should be satisfactory. Even 
numerous commercial illuminants, designed to give suitable 
distribution curves, fail to do justice to their light flux and 
its distribution, by violating fundamental physiological require- 
ments. 


262 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

The physiological problems of illumination, that is, the effects 
entering between the objective distribution of light flux in space, 
and the subjective effects produced on the human eye, thus are 
the most important with which the illuminating engineer has to 
deal, and the first feature which must be recognized is that the 
objective illumination, as measured by the photometer, is no 
criterion of the subjective illumination, that is, the physiological 
effect produced by it, as regard to clearness, comfort and satis- 
faction, and it is the subjective illumination by which the success 
of an illuminating engineering problem is judged. 

The most important physiological effects are : 

(a) The contraction of the pupil. The pupil of the eye auto- 
matically reacts, by contraction, on high brilliancy at or near 
the sensitive spot, that is, the point of the retina, on which we 
focus the image of the object at which we look, and to a some- 
what lesser extent on high brilliancy anywhere else in the field 
of vision. If, therefore, points or areas of high brilliancy are 
in the field of vision, especially if near to objects at which we 
look, the pupil contracts the more the higher the brilliancy, 
and thereby reduces the amount of light flux which enters the 
eye, that is, produces the same result as if the objective 
illumination had been correspondingly reduced, intensified by 
the uncomfortable effect of seeing high brilliancy. The exist- 
ence of points of high brilliancy in the field of vision thus results 
in a great waste of light flux, and additional discomfort, and, for 
satisfactory illumination, points of high brilliancy thus must 
be kept out of the field of vision. Light sources of high brilliancy 
must be arranged so that they cannot directly be seen, but the 
illumination accomplished by the light reflected from ceilings, 
etc., or from reflectors attached to the illuminant: indirect light- 
ing; or at least the light sources should be located where we 
are rarely liable to look at them, that is, with moderate-sized 
rooms, at or near the ceilings. Or light sources of moderate 
intrinsic brilliancy should be used, as the Moore tube, the 
mercury lamp, the Welsbach mantel. Or, with illuminants of 
high brilliancy, as the electric arc, the incandescent lamp 
(especially the tungsten filament), etc., the brilliancy of the 
illuminant must be reduced by enclosing it with a diffusing or 
diffracting globe or shade, as an opal or frosted or 
holophane globe, etc. 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 263 

No illumination, however, can be satisfactory in which the 
eye at any time can be exposed to the direct rays from a tungsten 
filament or an arc. While the methods of removing the high 
brilliancy of the illuminant usually involve a considerable loss of 
light flux, by absorption at the refracting surface, in the frosted 
or opal globe, etc., and the objective illumination thus is de- 
creased, if the methods of reducing the brilliancy are anywhere 
reasonably arranged, the light flux entering the eye, and thus 
the subjective illumination, is increased, and often very greatly. 
Thus while frosting an incandescent lamp decreases its light 
flux by about 15 per cent, in spite thereof usually more light 
flux enters the eye from the frosted lamp than from a clear glass 
lamp at the same distance. 

It is, therefore, inefficient to use illuminants of high brilliancy 
in the field of vision, and in addition makes the illumination 
uncomfortable and thereby unsatisfactory. Physiologically the 
brilliancy of the light source thus is one of the most important 
quantities. 

114. (6) Fatigue. When exposed to fairly high light flux den- 
sity, that is, high illumination, the nerves of the eye decrease 
in sensitivity, by fatigue, and inversely, in lower illumination 
or in darkness, increase in sensitivity. This reaction, or adjust- 
ment of the sensitivity of the nerves of vision to different intensi- 
ties of illumination, enables us to see equally well in illuminations 
varying in intensity by more than 10,000 to 1 (as daylight and 
artificial light). Thus, when entering a well-illuminated room 
from the darkness, it first appears glaring, until gradually 
the impression fades down to normal. Inversely, coming from 
a well-lighted room into a space of much lower illumination, it 
first appears practically dark, until gradually the eye adjusts 
itself, that is, the nerves of vision increase in sensitivity by their 
rest, and then we again see fairly well. 

Fatigue and contraction of the pupil thus are similar in their 
action, in that they reduce the physiological effect for high 
intensities. The contraction of the pupil, however, is almost 
instantaneous, and is a protective action against excessive bril- 
liancies in the field of vision, while the fatigue is a gradual 
adjustment to the average intensity of illumination, within the 
operating range of the human eye. 

By exposure for a considerable period to the fairly high illumi- 


264 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

nation required when working by artificial light, the sensitivity 
of the eye decreases, the illumination appears less bright, and 
thus a higher illumination is required than would be sufficient 
in the absence of fatigue, and the continuous use and absence 
of rest cause the sensation of strain, that is, irritation or an 
uncomfortable feeling, as especially noticeable when working 
or reading for a considerable length of time in rooms having a 
high uniform intensity of illumination, as meeting-rooms, some 
libraries, etc. If, however, the eye can rest even momentarily, 
by a change to lower intensity of illumination, fatigue is decreased, 
never becomes as complete and uncomfortable, and the concen- 
trated illumination of the working-table appears brighter than 
it would without the possibility of rest. 

A room having a uniform intensity of illumination thus appears 
glaring and uncomfortable, and for satisfactory illumination 
it is necessary not only to provide a sufficiently high intensity 
at the place where needed, but it is just as necessary to keep 
the intensity of illumination as low as permissible, wherever 
it is not needed, so as to afford to the eye rest from the fatigue. 
In some cases, as meeting-halls, schoolrooms, this may not be 
possible, but a uniform high intensity required, to be able to 
work or read anywhere in the room. Where, however, it is not 
necessary, it is not merely uneconomical to provide a uniform 
high intensity of illumination, but it is an illuminating engineer- 
ing defect, and a high intensity should be provided, as concen- 
trated illumination, only at those places where required, as 
at the reading-tables of the library, but the general illumination 
should be of lower intensity. While we rarely realize the cause, 
we feel the superiority of the combination of high concentrated 
and lower general illumination, by speaking of such illumination 
as home-like, restful, etc. Especially in places where considerable 
work has to be done by artificial illumination, as in libraries, 
factories, etc., to get satisfactory results, it is important to 
consider this effect of fatigue, and to properly combine a moder- 
ately low general illumination with a local higher intensity of 
illumination at the places of work. The latter can usually be 
given by a light source having a downward distribution, located 
sufficiently high above the place of work. The average standing 
or reading lamp, however, generally is not sufficiently high to 
accomplish the result. Obviously, in such local illumination, 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 265 

the brilliancy of the illumination must be kept low, as discussed 
above. 

Of considerable importance regarding fatigue is the quality, 
that is, the color, of the light : fatigue at high intensities occurs 
far more with yellow and orange rays than with white light, 
and very little with green and bluish-green light. Thus, in arti- 
ficial illumination, in which practically always the yellow and 
orange rays greatly preponderate, the question of fatigue is far 
more important than with the bluish-white diffused daylight, 
and the irritating effects of fatigue thus are mostly felt with 
artificial illumination. 

115. (c) Differences. Objects are seen and distinguished by 
differences in quality, that is, color, and in intensity, that is, 
brightness, of the light reflected by them. If there were no 
differences in color or in intensity throughout the field of vision, 
we would see light but would not distinguish objects. Therefore, 
in good illumination, the differences in color and in intensity 
should be sufficiently high to see clearly by them, but still limited 
so as not to preponderate to such extent as to distract the atten- 
tion from smaller differences. The differences in intensity, 
to give distinction, should be high, but at the same time are 
limited by the phenomena of fatigue and of the contraction 
of the pupil: the minimum intensity must still be sufficiently 
high to see clearly, and the maximum intensity not so high as 
to cause fatigue and contraction of the pupil, much beyond 
that corresponding to the average intensity, otherwise the vision 
becomes indistinct and unsatisfactory, and uncomfortable by 
too much contrast; that is, the intensity differences must give 
a sufficient, but not an excessive, contrast, if the illumination is 
to be satisfactory. 

Differences in quality, that is, in color, are to a limited extent 
only under the control of the illuminating engineer. In some 
cases the illuminating engineer can control or advise regarding 
the color of objects, as the walls, ceilings, etc. In most cases, 
however, the absolute color of the illuminated objects is not within 
the control of the illuminating engineer: for instance, in street 
lighting, the color of the street surface, its surroundings, as 
vegetation, houses, etc., are fixed and cannot be changed for 
effects of illumination. So also in most cases of indoor illumina- 
tion. To some extent, however, the subjective color can be con- 


266 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

trolled by the choice of the proper shade of light, and thereby 
slight color differences increased and made more distinct, or 
decreased and thus obliterated. For instance, the color resulting 
from age and dirt is usually the color of carbon and of iron, 
yellowish brown or reddish brown, that is, colors at the long 
wave end of the spectrum. Spots and blemishes due to dirt 
or age, thus are made more distinct by using an illuminant defi- 
cient in the long waves of light, as the mercury lamp, while in- 
versely they are decreased by using a reddish-yellow illuminant, 
as the incandescent lamp or the candle. Thus the white arc 
lamp and still more so the bluish-green mercury lamp shows 
blemishes and slight color differences of age and dirt harsh and 
exaggerated, while the yellow light softens them and makes 
them disappear; and while, for a ballroom, the yellow light 
is thus preferred, and the mercury arc or even the ordinary 
white carbon arc would give a harsh and disagreeable effect, 
inversely the yellow light would be unsuitable where such slight 
differences should be distinguished. It is therefore essential 
for the illuminating engineer to choose as far as it is feasible the 
proper color of light, and an otherwise good illumination may be 
spoiled by using too white or too yellow a light. 

The main distinction of objects, however, is due to differences 
in intensity or brightness, and, for producing these, the shadows 
are of foremost assistance, and indeed the differences of inten- 
sity, by which we see objects, are to a large extent those due 
shadows. The study of the shadow thus is one of the most 
important subjects of illuminating engineering. If we have no 
shadows, but a perfectly diffused illumination, even if the 
intensity of illumination is sufficient, the illumination is unsatis- 
factory, as we lose the assistance of the shadows in distinguishing 
objects, and therefore find seeing more difficult, the illumination 
restless and uncomfortable. 

The use of shadows for illumination requires that we must 
have directed light, that is, light coming from one or a number 
of sources, and thus causing shadows, and not merely diffused 
illumination, that is, light coming from all directions and thus 
causing no shadows. While, however, in general perfectly dif- 
fused illumination is unsatisfactory, an illumination having only 
directed light is also unsatisfactory. If the light is all directed, 
as from a single arc, the shadows are absolutely black, we can- 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 267 

not see anything in them, and, in attempting to see the objects 
in the shadows, the illumination becomes tiring to the eyes, 
irritating and restless. 

For satisfactory illumination, it therefore is necessary to 
have sufficient directed light to mark the edge of the objects 
by their shadow, and thereby improve distinction, but at the 
same time sufficient diffused light to see clearly in the shad- 
ows; that is, a proper proportion of directed and diffused light is 
necessary. 

In cases in which all the objects assume practically the same 
color, as in flour mills or foundries, a diffused illumination without 
shadows would make the illumination so bad as to be practically 
useless. In other cases, as a drafting-room, where all the objects 
requiring distinction are in one plane, as the drafting board, and 
the distinction is exclusively by differences of color and intensity, 
but not by shadows, a perfectly diffused illumination is required, 
and shadows would be objectionable and misleading, and this 
is one of the cases where directed light is objectionable. 

While with a single light source all the light issuing from it 
is directed light, by using a number of illuminants, the overlap 
of their light fluxes causes more or less light to reach objects 
from all directions, and thereby gives the effect of diffused light, 
except at those places where the shadows cast by the different 
light sources coincide, and by proper positions of sufficient 
numbers of light sources this can be avoided. The use of a 
number of light sources thus offers a means of increasing the 
proportion of diffused to directed light. 

116. It is not sufficient, however, to have merely a combination 
of diffused and directed light in the proper proportion, but the 
direction of the latter also is of importance. In some simple 
cases this is obvious, as, in writing, the directed light should 
be from in front on the left side above the table, so as not to 
cast the shadow on the work. The purpose of the shadow in 
illumination is to mark the edge of the object, and its height 
by the length of the shadow. The shadow, therefore, should 
not extend too far from the object to which it is related, other- 
wise it loses its close relation to it and becomes misleading and 
thereby interferes with good illumination. Thus the directed 
light should come from above, that is, in a direction making a 
considerable angle with the horizontal, so as to limit the length 


268 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

of the shadow without, however, being vertical, as the latter 
would largely obliterate shadows. Perhaps an angle of 45 to 
60 degrees with the horizontal would be most satisfactory. 
The practically horizontal shadows cast in the usual form 
of street lighting therefore are not satisfactory for best illumi- 
nation. 

The number of shadows is of less importance. While in nature 
objects have one shadow only, cast by the sun, indoors we are 
familiar with seeing several shadows due to the diffused day- 
light from several windows. Of high importance, however, is 
the shape of the illuminant, in so far as it determines the outer 
edge of the shadow. The purpose of the shadow is to give an 
intensity difference at the edge of the object, and thereby make 
it easier to see the object. The shadow, however, has another 
edge, its outer end, and that we should not see, as no object 
ends there, or at least it must be such that it cannot be mistaken 
for the edge of an object. The problem thus is not merely to 
provide sufficient directed light to cast a shadow, but the shadow 
should be such that only one side, at the edge of the object, is 
sharply defined, while the other edge of the shadow, which ter- 
minates on the flat surrounding surface, should gradually fade 
or blur. If we have to look closely to determine that the outer 
edge of the shadow is not the edge of another object, the strain 
of distinguishing between the edge of an object and the edge 
of a shadow makes the illumination uncomfortable and thus 
unsatisfactory. In the shadows cast by a single arc in a clear 
glass globe, this difficulty of distinguishing between the edge 
of a shadow and the edge of an object is especially marked, and, 
combined with the invisibility of objects in the shadow, makes 
such shadows appear on first sight like ditches or obstructions. 

In the use of shadows in illuminating engineering it thus is 
necessary to have the outer edge of the shadows blur or gradually 
fade, and this requires that the source of directed light be not a 
point, but a sufficiently large area to scatter the light at the outer 
edge of the shadow, preferably even more than is the case 
with the shadows cast by the sun. This requires enclosing 
the illuminant by a fairly large opal globe or other similar 
device; that is, have the light issue from a fairly large luminous 
area. 

It must be recognized that the proper treatment of the shadows 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 269 

is one of the most important problems determining the success 
or failure of an illumination. 

117. Color sensitivity. The maximum of sensitivity of the 
eye shifts with decreasing illumination from yellow to bluish 
green, and where a low intensity of illumination is used, as in 
street lighting, a source of light which is rich in the shorter 
waves, that is, a white light, is superior in its physiological 
illuminating value to a yellow light of the same or even 
higher light flux, while inversely at high values of illumina- 
tion, as for decorative purposes, the yellow light is more 
effective. 

Therefore it is a mistake to choose a yellow light source for 
illumination of very low intensity, or a white or bluish-green 
light for illumination attempting high intensity effects. Thus, 
for the average street lighting of American cities, the white arc 
is superior to the yellow flame arc, but, to produce a glare of light, 
the latter would be superior. 

While there are further physiological effects which are of im- 
portance in illuminating engineering, the above four may illus- 
trate the long step which exists between the distribution of the 
light flux as measurable by the photometer, and the success or 
failure of the illumination represented by it. 

The requirements of satisfactory illumination can thus be 
grouped in two main classes, referring respectively to economy 
and to comfort, and the characteristics are: 

(1) General or uniform, and local or concentrated illumination, 
and combination of both. This is of importance for economy : to 
avoid the production of unnecessary light flux; and comfort: to 
reduce the effect of fatigue. 

(2) Diffused and directed illumination, and combinations of 
both, and the theory of the shadow. This is of importance for 
the comfort of illumination, in securing clearest distinction. 

(3) Quality or color of light, of importance in economy, to 
suit the color to the intensity of illumination, and to comfort, 
in increasing or softening differences in color shades. 

(4) Massed and distributed illumination, as controlling the 
distribution of the light flux, and thereby the economy and also 
the diffusion. 

(5) Direct illumination and indirect illumination, shaded, 
diffracted, diffused, or reflected light, in its relation to the bril- 


270 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

liancy of the light source, and thereby the effect of the contraction 
of the pupil, on economy and comfort. 
Some of the common mistakes made in illumination are : 

(1) Unsatisfactory proportion of general and of concentrated 
light. 

(2) Exposure of high brilliancies in the field of vision, as naked 
filaments. 

(3) Unsuitable proportion of diffused and directed light. 

(4) Improper direction of directed light and thereby improper 
length of shadows. 

(5) Sharp edges of shadows. 

In order to illustrate the preceding principles, some typical 
cases may be considered : 

(a) Domestic lighting. 

118. Domestic lighting usually requires a combination of a 
concentrated illumination of fairly high intensity locally at the 
work-table, dining-table, etc., and a general illumination of low 
intensity, to secure comfort and economy. Occasionally, as in 
halls, etc., the local lighting is absent and only general illumina- 
tion required, while for instance in a sick room the general illumi- 
nation is absent and only local illumination required. 

In this illumination the proportion between directed and dif- 
fused light should be such as to give the proper effect of shadows. 
The problem of domestic illumination thus is to produce a defi- 
nite distribution of light flux density, with a definite proportion 
between diffused and directed light. If we deviate from the 
proper proportion on one side, the room appears cold and uncom- 
fortable; if we deviate in the other direction, it appears dark and 
gloomy. 

The light issuing directly from a single illuminant is directed 
light; the light issuing from a number of illuminants is diffused 
in proportion to the number of sources by the overlap of the light 
fluxes of the illuminants. The light reflected from walls and 
ceilings is diffused light. The proportion between the light 
reflected from walls and ceilings, or the indirect light, and the 
direct light from the illuminants, varies with the reflecting power 
of walls and ceilings, that is, their brightness or darkness. The 
proportion between directed and diffused light thus can be 
changed, and the diffused light increased by increasing the num- 
ber of illuminants, and also by increasing the brightness of walls 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 271 

and ceilings. With a given brightness of walls and ceilings, the 
desired distribution of the light flux — a local high and general low 
intensity — can be produced by a single illuminant having the 
proper distribution curve of light flux. In this case, however, 
usually we get too much directed, and not enough diffused, light. 
The same distribution of light flux can be produced by a number 
of illuminants properly located : nearer together for the local than 
for the general illumination. In the latter case we get more 
diffused and less directed light, and thus by choosing the number 
of light sources it is possible, with any given brightness of walls 
and ceilings, to get the desired distribution of light flux and at 
the same time the proper proportion of directed and diffused 
light. With a different brightness of walls and ceilings, the dis- 
tribution curve of a single light source, required to give the 
desired light flux distribution, is correspondingly changed, and, 
the lighter the walls and ceilings, the more light is reflected, giving 
a diffused general illumination, and thus less direct light from the 
illuminant is required for the general illumination. With in- 
creasing reflecting power of walls and ceilings, the proportion of 
diffused light increases, and the number of light sources which 
are required to give the proper proportion between directed and 
diffused light is decreased, and inversely it is increased with 
increasing darkness of walls and ceiling. Therefore, in a room 
with light walls, a smaller number of light sources is required for 
good illumination than in a room with dark walls, assuming the 
same intensity of local and of general illumination. 

119. The problem of domestic illumination: to get a certain 
distribution of illumination, with a definite proportion between 
directed and diffused light, thus leaves one independent variable 
— the brightness of walls and ceilings. This is necessary, as the 
problem of domestic illumination is twofold: to get the proper 
illumination by means of the daylight, and also to get it for 
artificial illumination. During daytime, the windows are the 
source of light, the directed light issues from the windows, the 
diffused light from the walls and ceilings and by the overlap of 
the light from several windows. The proper distribution between 
local and general illumination during daytime, and at the same 
time the proportion of directed and diffused light, thus deter- 
mines the number of windows and the brightness of walls and 
ceilings, in the manner as discussed before. 


272 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

As the reflecting power of walls and ceilings is fixed by day- 
light considerations, it cannot be chosen, or at least only to a 
limited extent, by considerations of artificial illumination, but, as 
found above, this is not necessary, since by a combination of a 
suitable number of light sources of proper distribution curves 
the problem of artificial illumination may be solved. To some 
extent, due to the quality of artificial light and daylight, the walls 
can give a different reflecting power for the one than for the 
other. As artificial light is deficient in blue and green, a bluish 
or greenish shade of walls and ceilings gives them a greater reflect- 
ing power for daylight than for artificial light — which usually 
is desirable — and inversely with a reddish-yellow shade. 

(b) Street Lighting. 

120. The problem of street illumination is to produce a uni- 
form low intensity. For reasons of economy, the intensity must 
be low, at least in American cities, in which the mileage of streets, 
for the same population, usually is many times greater than in 
European cities, and, at the same time, the same type of illumi- 
nant is usually required for the entire area of the city. The low 
intensity of illumination requires the quality of light which has 
the highest physiological effect at low densities, that is, white 
light, and excludes the yellow light as physiologically inefficient 
for low intensities. Still better would be the bluish green of 
the mercury lamp, but is not much liked, due to its color. Quite 
satisfactory also is the greenish yellow of the Welsbach mantel 
for these low intensities. The American practice of preferring 
the white light of the carbon or magnetite arc thus is correct 
and in agreement with the principles of illumination, and the 
yellow-flame arc can come into consideration — even if it were not 
handicapped by the necessity of frequent trimming — only in 
those specific cases where a high intensity of illumination is 
used, as would be only in the centers of some large cities. 

Uniformity of illumination is specially important in street light- 
ing, where the observer moves along the street, and, due to the 
low intensity, the decrease of subjective illumination by fatigue 
is especially objectionable. For a street illuminant, a distribu- 
tion curve is required which gives a maximum intensity some- 
what below the horizontal, no light in the upper hemisphere, and 
very little downward light. Street lamps therefore should be 
judged and compared by the illumination given midways be- 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 273 

tween adjacent lamps, or at the point of minimum intensity, or, 
in other words, by the intensity in a direction approximately 
10 deg. below the horizontal. This also is in agreement with 
American practice. However, it is very important that the 
downward intensity be very low, and in this respect it is not 
always realized that the light thrown downward is not merely a 
waste of light flux, but is harmful in producing a glaring spot at 
or near the lamp and, by the fatigue caused by it, reducing the 
effective illumination at the minimum point between the lamps. 
Most objectionable in this respect is the open direct current car- 
bon arc and those types of lamps giving a downward distribution, 
but even with the enclosed arc lamp the distribution of light on 
the street surface is still far from uniform, and the intensity 
too high near the lamp, and in this respect improvements are 
desirable. 

121. The greatest defects of the present street illumination, 
which frequently makes it inferior in subjective illumination even 
to the far lower illumination given by the full moon, are the 
absence of diffused light, and especially the improper direction 
and termination of the shadows, and also the high brilliancy of 
the illuminant. The light of the usual street lamp is practically 
all directed light, issuing in a nearly horizontal direction from a 
point source. Thus the shadows are far longer than permissible, 
and terminate sharply and without blur; objects in the shadows 
are practically invisible, and the end of the shadow looks like the 
edge of an object, thus producing a misleading effect, which 
results in unsatisfactory illumination. To give a somewhat 
better direction to the light requires considerable increase of the 
height of the lamp above the street surface. This also would 
essentially decrease the intensity of illumination below and near 
the lamp, without appreciably affecting the intensity at the 
minimum point, and thus would give a more uniform and thereby 
better illumination. No valid reason usually exists against 
greatly increasing the height of the lamps, except that of the 
greater cheapness of short lamp posts, which is hardly justifiable. 
It is, however, more difficult to give a proper blur to the ends of 
shadows, so as to distinguish them from edges of objects. This 
would require an increase of the surface of the illuminant, by 
opal or frosted globe, etc. Enclosing the arc by an opal globe, 
however, scatters the light more uniformly in all directions, and 


274 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

thereby spoils the distribution curve, and interferes with the 
required uniformity of illumination : with an opal globe, the 
intensity in the downward direction does not differ very much 
from that in the horizontal, while with lamps 20 feet above the 
street level, and at distances of 200 feet from each other, the 
downward intensity for uniform illumination should be not much 
more than one-twenty-fifth of that under an angle of sin $ = 

20 

— = 0.2; or 12 deg. below the horizontal. Very much better is 

-L \J{J 

the effect of a frosted or sand-blasted globe. The best way of 
maintaining a proper distribution curve and at the same time 
diffusing the light, so as to reduce its brilliancy and blur the 
shadows, appears the use of prismatic diffraction, on the principle 
of the Fresnel lenses of lighthouses (holophane). Obviously, 
where the lamps are close together, as in the center of large cities, 
their light fluxes overlap and thereby give a better diffusion, and, 
at the same time, the midway point between lamps is under a 
greater angle against the horizontal ; thus a more downward dis- 
tribution of the light flux permissible. For the largest part of 
American street lighting, however, this does not apply. 

122. In the early days of using arc lamps for American city 
lighting, lighting towers were frequently used, and such tower 
lighting has still survived in some cities. One or a number 
of arc lamps are installed on a high tower and were supposed 
from there, like artificial suns, to spread their light over an entire 
city district. 

This method of city lighting was found unsatisfactory, as it 
did not give enough light. It is unsatisfactory, however, not 
in principle, but because it was too ambitious a scheme. If, 
in street illumination, we double the distance between the lamps, 
each unit must have four times the light flux to get the same 
minimum flux density, as the distance is doubled, and the flux 
density decreases with the square of the distance. At twice 
the distance between the lamps, each lamp thus must have 
four times the light flux, and each mile of street thus requires 
twice the power. Reducing the distance between lamps to one- 
half reduces the power to one-half with the same minimum 
illumination. In street lighting it is therefore of advantage to 
use as many units of illuminants as possible, and bring them 
together as close as possible, and correspondingly lower their 


ILLUMINATION AND ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING. 275 

intensity, up to the point where the increasing cost of taking 
care of the larger number of units and increasing cost of poles 
and connections compensates for the decreasing cost of energy. 
There is a minimum which probably is fairly near our present 
practice. 

When, however, you come to square and exposition lighting, 
you find that the distance between the illuminants has no 
effect on the efficiency. Let us assume that we double the 
distances between the lamps which light up a large area. Then 
each lamp requires four times the light flux to get the same 
minimum flux density between the lamps, but at twice the 
distance between the lamps each lamp illuminates four times the 
area, and the total power per square mile of lighting a large area, 
like an exposition, thus is independent of the number of lamps 
used, and, whether you place them close together or far apart, 
you require the same total flux of light, and if you keep the same 
proportions of height from the ground and distance between 
lamps, you also get the same variation between maximum and 
minimum intensity. But, supposing the lamps to be placed 
further apart, the maximum or minimum points also are further 
apart, and you get a more satisfactory illumination by having 
a less rapid intensity variation. That points to the conclusion 
that, for exposition lighting, the most efficient way would be to 
use a relatively moderate number of high-power sources of 
light on high towers at distances from each other of the same 
magnitude as the height of the towers. We would get a greater 
uniformity and better physiological effect by having the illumi- 
nants further apart, and they would require the same total 
light flux, and therefore the same power, as if you bring the lamps 
close to the ground, and place them very close to each other. 
The tower lighting therefore is the ideal form for lighting a large 
area. When the arc was first introduced, it was so much superior 
to any other illuminant known before, that people vastly over- 
rated it. They thought that they could light the whole city 
by it, and in trying to do so these towers would have been the 
proper way, but very soon it was found that even with the effi- 
ciency of the arc, to light not only the streets, but the whole 
area of the city, would require an entirely impracticable amount 
of light flux. It thus was too ambitious a scheme for city 
lighting, but it should be done in exposition work. City illumi- 


276 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

nation thus has come down from this first ambition to light the 
whole city to an attempt to light only the streets. For the 
latter purpose, however, lighting towers are inefficient, since 
much of the light flux is wasted on those places which we no 
longer attempt to light. In exposition lighting, however, the 
most effective general illumination would be given by white 
arcs on high towers, leaving the concentrated or decorative 
illumination to the incandescent lamp and flame arc, of yellow 
color.
