LECTURE IV. 
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 

Chemical Effects. 

31. Where intense radiation is intercepted by a body chemical 
action may result by the heat energy into which the radiation is 
converted. This, however, is not a direct chemical effect of 
radiation but an indirect effect, resulting from the energy of the 
radiation. 

Direct chemical effects of radiation are frequent. It is such an 
effect on which photography is based : the dissociating action of 
radiation on silver salts, the chloride in ordinary photographic 
paper, the bromide and iodide in the negative plate and the quick 
printing papers. This chemical action is greatest in the violet 
and ultra-violet and decreases with increasing wave length, 
hence is less in the green, small in the yellow, and almost absent in 
the red and ultra-red, so that the short waves, blue, violet and 
ultra-violet, have sometimes been called " chemical rays." This, 
however, is a misnomer, just as the term "heat rays" sometimes 
applied to red and ultra-red rays. In so far as when intercepted 
they are converted into heat, all rays are heat rays, but neither 
the ultra-red nor any other radiation is heat, but it may become 
heat when it ceases to be radiation. Thus all radiations are 
chemical rays, that is, produce chemical action, if they strike a 
body which is responsive to them. 

The chemical action of radiation is specific to its frequency and 
seems to be some kind of a resonance effect. We may picture to 
ourselves that the frequency of vibration of a silver atom is that 
of violet or ultra-violet light, and therefore, when struck by a 
wave of this frequency, is set in vibration by resonance, just as a 
tuning fork is set in vibration by a sound wave of the frequency 
with which it can vibrate, and if the vibration of the silver atom, 
in response to the frequency of radiation, becomes sufficiently 
intense, it breaks away from the atom with which it is chemically 


64 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

combined in the compound, the silver bromide, etc., and this 
compound thus splits up, dissociates. The phenomenon, how- 
ever, must be more complex, as a simple resonance vibration 
would be especially pronounced at one definite frequency, the 
frequency of complete resonance, and rapidly decrease for higher 
and for lower frequencies. The chemical action of radiation on 
silver compounds, however, does not show such a response to any 
definite frequency, but, while strongest in the ultra-violet, ex- 
tends over the entire range from the frequency of green light 
beyond the ultra-violet and up to the highest frequencies of 
X-rays. That the chemical activity of radiation is some form of 
resonance, is, however, made very probable by the relation which 
exists between the active frequency range and the weight of the 
atom or molecule which responds to the radiation. Thus, while 
the fairly heavy silver atom (atomic weight 108) responds to 
rays near the violet end of the visible spectrum, the much lighter 
oxygen atom (atomic weight 16) responds only to much higher 
frequencies, to those of the physiologically most destructive rays, 
about one to two octaves beyond the visible spectrum. These 
very short radiations energetically produce ozone 03,from oxygen 
02, probably by dissociating oxygen molecules 02,into free atoms, 
and these free atoms then join existing molecules: 0 + 02 = 03, 
thus forming ozone. Possibly their destructive physiological 
action is due to this ability to cause resonance with the oxygen 
atom and thereby destroy molecular structures. 

32. Response to the long waves of red and ultra-red light thus 
may be expected from atoms or groups of atoms which are very 
much heavier than the silver atom, and this indeed seems to be 
the case in the action of radiation on the life of the plants. There 
the response is not by atoms, but by the much heavier groups of 
atoms, radicals of carbon compounds, which separate and recom- 
bine in response to radiations and thus produce in vegetable 
organisms the metabolism which we call life. 

The action of radiation on plant life thus seems to be a chemi- 
cal action, and this would be the most important chemical action, 
as on it depends the life of the vegetation and thereby also the 
existence of animal life and, thus, our own. This action by which 
the vegetation converts the energy of radiation into chemical 
energy is related to the presence of chlorophyl, a green body 
which exhibits a red fluorescence. I show you here a solution 


CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 65 

thereof in alcohol. This use of the energy of radiation occurs 
only in those parts of the plant in which chlorophyl is present, 
usually shown by its green color, that is, in the leaves and young 
stems. In those plants in which the leaves have lost their chloro- 
phyl in taking up other functions — as the function of protection 
against attack by conversion into spines in the cacti — the stems 
and trunks have acquired the function of energy supply from 
radiation, and show the green color of chlorophyl. When the 
leaves die in the fall their chlorophyl disappears and they change 
to yellow or red color. Those parts of the plants which contain 
chlorophyl, mainly the leaves, take carbon dioxide (C02) from 
the air through breathing openings (stomata), absorb the radia- 
tion, and convert its energy into chemical energy, and use this 
energy in splitting up or dissociating the C02, exhausting the 
oxygen 02 and using the carbon in producing the complex carbon 
compounds of their structure: fiber (cellulose), starch, proto- 
plasm, etc. The energy of plant life thus is derived from radia- 
tion and their work is constructive or synthetic, that is, they 
produce complex chemical compounds from simple ones: the 
carbon dioxide of the air, the nitrates and phosphates of the soil, 
etc. Inversely, the animal organism is analytic, it converts the 
chemical energy of complex compounds into mechanical and 
heat energy by splitting them into simpler compounds, burning 
them in the lungs or gills. For the supply of mechanical energy 
which maintains the life, the animal organism thus depends upon 
the synthetic work of the vegetation by consuming as food the 
complex compounds constructed by the plants from the energy 
of radiation, either directly (vegetarians), or indirectly, by eating 
other animals, which in their turn live on the vegetation. Thus, 
while the plants take in from the air carbon dioxide C02, exhaust 
the oxygen 02, and convert the C into complex compounds, the 
animal takes in oxygen 02, by it burns up the complex carbon 
compounds derived from the plants, and exhausts C02 as product 
of combustion, but in its ultimate result, all life on the earth de- 
pends for its energy on radiation, which is made available in the 
plants by conversion to chemical energy and used as such by the 
animals. 

The radiations which supply the energy of plant life, probably 
are the long waves of yellow, red and ultra-red light, while the 
short waves of blue, violet and ultra-violet cannot be used by the 


66 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

plant, but are harmful, kill the vegetation. This can easily be 
understood : to the long waves of red and yellow light the atoms 
do not respond, but only the much heavier groups of atoms or car- 
bon radicals, and these thus separate and recombine and thereby 
constitute what we call life. To very short waves, that is, high 
frequencies, these heavy groups of atoms cannot respond, but 
single atoms would respond thereto and thus by their separation 
break up and destroy the atomic groups. That is, the resonant 
dissociation produced by low frequency of radiation extends only 
to the groups of atoms and thereby results in their separation and 
recombination to heavier molecules : life, while the resonant dis- 
sociation produced by high frequencies extends to the atom and 
thereby splits up and destroys the molecules of the living organ- 
ism, that is, death. Therefore the short waves of radiation, 
green, blue, etc., which are more or less harmful to plants, are 
not used but are reflected by the chlorophyl; hence the green 
color. To some extent violet radiation is absorbed by chloro- 
phyl, but it is questionable whether the energy of violet light 
directly contributes to the chemical action, and it is rather 
probable that the violet radiation is converted into red light by 
fluorescence — chlorophyl fluoresces red — and used as red 
light. Excessive violet radiation seems to be harmful. 

Physical Effects. 

33. Some of the most interesting physical effects of radiation 
are those by which it is converted into another form of radiation : 
fluorescence and phosphorescence. 

Many substances have the property of converting some of the 
radiation which is absorbed by them into radiation of a different 
wave length, that is, act as frequency converter of radiation, 
fluorescence. Many bodies when exposed to radiation store some 
of the energy of radiation in such a manner as to give it out again 
afterwards and thus, after exposure to light, glow in the darkness 
with gradually decreasing intensity, phosphorescence. These 
phenomena probably belong to the least understood effects 
of radiation. They are very common, but phosphorescence 
usually lasts such a short time that it can be observed only 
by special apparatus, although a few bodies continue to phos- 
phoresce for hours and even days. Fluorescence also is usually 


CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 67 

so weak as to escape notice, although in a few bodies it is very 
strong. 

The change of frequency in fluorescence always seems to be a 
lowering of the frequency, that is, an increase of wave length, and 
in phosphorescence also the light given out seems always to be 
of lower frequency than the light absorbed and indeed, fluores- 
cence and phosphorescence seem to be essentially the same 
phenomenon, radiation is absorbed and its energy given out again 
as radiation of lower frequency and that part of the returned 
radiation which appears during the absorption we call fluores- 
cence, that part which appears later, phosphorescence. There is, 
however, frequently a change of the color of the light between 
fluorescence and phosphorescence and also between phosphores- 
cence immediately after exposure to light and some time after- 
wards. For instance, some calcite (calcium carbonate or lime- 
stone) fluoresces crimson, but phosphoresces dark red. The 
phosphorescence of calcium sulphide changes from blue in the 
beginning to nearly white some time after, etc. 

Due to the change of frequency to longer waves the longest 
visible rays, red, orange and yellow, produce no fluorescence or 
very little thereof, as their fluorescent and phosphorescent radia- 
tion would usually be beyond the red, in the invisible ultra-red. 
Blue, violet and ultra-violet light produce the most intense 
effects, as a lowering in frequency of these radiations brings them 
well within the visible range. 

Ultra-violet light is best suited for studying fluorescence as it is 
not visible, and thus only the fluorescent light is visible; white 
light, for instance, does not show the same marked effect, since the 
direct white light is superimposed upon the light of fluorescence. 
Most brilliant effects, however, are produced by using a source of 
light which is deficient in the frequencies given by fluorescence 
and then looking at the fluorescent body through a glass having 
the same color as that given by fluorescence. Thus the least 
traces of red fluorescence can be discovered by looking at the 
body through a red glass, in the illumination given by the mer- 
cury lamp. As the mercury lamp contains practically no red 
rays, seen through a red glass everything appears nearly black or 
invisible except red fluorescent bodies, which appear self-lumi- 
nous, glowing in a light of their own, and appear like red hot 
bodies. 


68 RADIATION, LIGHT, AND ILLUMINATION. 

In the illumination given by the mercury lamp I here drop a 
few drops of a solution of rhodamine 6 G, rhodamine R and 
uranine (aniline dyes) into a large beaker of water. As you see, 
when sinking down and gradually spreading, they appear — 
especially against a dark background — as brilliant luminous 
clouds of orange, red and green, and seen through a red glass 
they appear like clouds of fire. I change to the illumination 
given by the incandescent lamp and all the brilliancy disappears, 
fluorescence ceases and we have a dull red colored solution. I 
show you here the sample card of a silk store of different colored 
silks. Looking at it through a red glass, in the mercury light all 
disappear except a few, which you can pick out by their lumi- 
nosity: they are different colors, pinks, reds, heliotrope, etc., but 
all containing the same red fluorescent aniline dye, rhodamine. 
A glass plate coated with a thick layer of transparent varnish, 
colored by rhodamine, appears like a sheet of red hot iron in the 
mercury light, especially through a red glass, while in the light of 
the incandescent lamp it loses all its brilliancy. 

This solution of rhodamine 6 G in alcohol, fluoresces a glaring 
orange in the mercury light, in the light of a carbon arc lamp (or 
in daylight) it fluoresces green and less brilliant. Thus you see 
that the color of the fluorescent light is not always the same, but 
depends to some extent on the frequency of radiation which 
causes the fluorescence. 

Here I have a sheet of paper covered with calcium sulphide 
and a lump of willemite (zinc silicate) and some pieces of calcite. 
As you see, none of them show any appreciable fluorescence 
in the mercury light. But if I turn off the mercury light, the 
calcium sulphide phosphoresces brightly in a blue glow, the others 
do not. Now I show you all three under the ultra-violet rays of 
the condenser discharge between iron terminals, or ultra-violet 
lamp (Fig. 11) and you see all three fluoresce brilliantly, in blue, 
green and red. Turning off the light all three continue to glow 
with about the same color, that is, phosphoresce, but the red 
fluorescence of the calcite very rapidly decreases, the green glow 
of the willemite a little slower, but the blue glow of the calcium 
sulphide screen persists, decreasing very little. I now hold my 
hand back of it and close to it and you see the picture of the hand 
appear on the screen by an increase of the luminosity where by 
contact with the hand the temperature of the screen was slightly 


CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATION. 69 

raised, thus showing the effect of the temperature rise in increas- 
ing phosphorescence. 

These substances which I show you, calcium sulphide, cal- 
cium carbonate (calcite), zinc silicate (willemite), are not fluo- 
rescent or phosphorescent themselves, but their luminescence is 
due to a small percentage of some impurities contained in them. 
Chemically pure substances and concentrated solutions of the 
aniline dyes, or these dyes in their solid form, do not show the 
luminescence, but only when in very diluted solutions; that is, 
luminescence as fluorescence and phosphorescence seems to be 
the property of very diluted solutions of some substances in 
others. Thus a sheet of paper or cardboard colored red by 
rhodamine does not fluoresce, but if a small quantity of rhoda- 
mine is added to some transparent varnish and the paper colored 
red by a heavy layer of this varnish it fluoresces brightly red. 

To show you the fluorescent spectrum, I have here a mercury 
lamp surrounded by a very diluted solution of rhodamine 6 G, 
and some rhodamine R, contained between two concentric glass 
cylinders. As you see, through the spectroscope a broad band 
appears in the red and the green light has faded considerably. 
You also notice that the light of this lamp, while still different 
from white light, does not give anything like the ghastly effect of 
human faces, as the plain mercury lamp, but contains considerable 
red rays, though not yet enough. I also show you a mercury 
lamp surrounded by a screen of a very dilute solution of uranine: 
you see, its light is bright greenish yellow, but much less ghastly 
than the plain mercury light and the spectroscope shows the 
mercury lines on a fluorescent spectrum, which extends as a con- 
tinuous luminous band from the green to and beyond the red. 
You also see that with this uranine screen the mercury lamp 
gives more light than without it : considerable of its ultra-violet 
and violet light is converted to yellow and thereby made visible 
or more effective.
