FIFTH LECTURE 


V l>nte 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 

mHREE-PHASE is used altogether for long distance 
transmission. Two-phase is not used any more, and 
direct current is being proposed, having been used 
abroad in a few cases : but due to the difficulty of generation 
and utilization, it is not probable that it will find any extended 
use, so that it does not need to be considered. 

FREQUENCY 

The frequency depends to a great extent on the character 
of the load, that is, whether the power is used for alternating 
current distribution — 60 cycles^-or for conversion to direct 
current — 25 cycles. For the transmission line, 25 cycles has the 
advantage that the charging current is less and the inductive 
drop is less, because charging current and inductance voltage 
are proportional to the frequency. 

VOLTAGE 

11,000 to 13,200 volts and more recently, even 22,000 
volts is most common for shorter distances, as 10 to 20 miles, 
since this is about the highest voltage for which generators can 
be built; its use therefore saves the step-up transformers, that 
is, the generator feeds directly into the line and to the step- 
down transformers for the regular load. 

The next step is 30,000 volts ; that is, 33,000 volts at the 
generator, 30,000 at the receiving end of the line. No inter- 
mediate voltages between this and the voltage for which 
generators can be wound is used, as 30,000 volts does not 
yet offer any insulator troubles ; but line insulators can be built 
at moderate cost for this voltage, and as step-up transformers 


64 GENERAL LECTURES 

have to be used, it is not worth while to consider any lower 
voltage than 33,000 volts. This voltage transmits economically 
up to distances of 50 to 60 miles. 

40,000 to 44,000 volts is the next step ; it is used for high 
power transmission lines of greater distance, where reliability 
of operation is of importance and the use of a conservative 
voltage therefore preferable to the attempt at economizing by 
the use of extra high voltages. 

A number of 60,000 volt systems are in more or less 
successful operation, and systems of 80,000 to 110,000 volts 
are in construction and a few in operation. Where the dis- 
tances are very great, power valuable, and continuity of ser- 
vice not of such foremost importance, such voltages are justi- 
fied in the present state of the art. 

In such very high voltage systems, the transformers are 
occasionally wound so that they can be connected for half 
voltage, for operating the line at half voltage, until the load 
has sufficiently increased to require full voltage; or the 
transformers are built for star or Y connection at full 
voltage, and at first operated in ring or delta connection, 
at — 7| = 57% of full voltage. 

The cost of a long distance transmission line depends on 
the voltage used. 

The cost of line conductors decreases with the square of 
the voltage. 

At twice the voltage, twice the line drop can be allowed 
with the same loss; at twice the voltage the current is only 
half for the same power, and twice the drop with half the 
current gives four times the resistance, that is, one-quarter 
the conductor section and cost. 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 65 

The cost of line insulators increases with increase of 
voltage. The cost of pole line increases with increase of 
voltage, since greater distance bet'.veen the conductors is 
necessary and so longer poles, longer cross arms, and heavier 
construction, and not so many circuits can be carried on the 
same pole line. 

The lower the voltage, the greater in general is the reli- 
ability of operation, since a larger margin of safety can be 
allowed. 

Since a part of the cost of the transmission line decreases, 
another part increases with the voltage, a certain voltage will 
be most economical. 

Lower voltage increases the cost of the conductor, higher 
voltage increases the cost of insulators and line construction, 
and decreases the reliability. 

The most economical voltage of a transmission line varies 
with the cost of copper. When copper is very high, higher 
voltages are more economical than when copper is low. The 
same applies to aluminum, since the price of aluminum has 
been varied with that of copper. 

Aluminum generally is used as stranded conductor. In 
the early days single wire gave much trouble by flaws in the 
wire. Aluminum expands more than copper with temperature 
changes, and so when installing the line in summer, a greater 
sag must be allowed than with copper, otherwise it stretches 
so tight in winter that it may tear apart. Aluminum also is 
more difficult to join together, since it cannot be welded. 

For the same conductivity an aluminum line has about 
twice the size, but one-half of the weight of a copper conductor, 
and costs 10% less; but copper has a permanent value, while 
the price of aluminum may sometime drop altogether, as the 
metal has no intrinsic value, being one of the most common 


66 


GENERAL LECTURES 


constituents of the surface of the earth, and its cost is merely 
that of its separation or reduction. 

LOSSES IN LINE DUE TO HIGH VOLTAGE 

The loss in the line by brush discharge or corona effect 
is nothing up to a certain voltage, but at a certain voltage it 
begins and very rapidly increases. 

The voltage at which a loss by corona effect begins is 
where the air at the surface of the conductor breaks down, 
becomes conducting and thus luminous. This occurs at a 
potential gradient of 100,000 to 120,000 volts per inch. 

The potential gradient is highest at the surface of the 
conductor. 


e 


J? 


o 


■>* 


c/ 


Fig. 18. 


In Fig. i8 let 

R = radius of conductor. 
2 d = distance between conductor centres. 
At a point x from the centre O the potential is 
c c 2 C X 


^ = 


d' — X* 


d — X d + X 

for:x = d — R 

that is, at the conductor surface, it is : 
Ql=e 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 67 

Substituting this in the equation, gives : 
c 

hence: 

c = eR 

therefore the potential at point x is : 
2 R X 
*~ d» — x' ^ 
and the potential gradient: 

_ d_f_ _ 2 R(d^ + x^) 
^~ d X ~ (d* — x^)* ^ 

hence for : x = d — R or the conductor surface • §fo = ^ 

If this potential gradient becomes greater than the break- 
down strength of air, or ioo,cxx) volts per inch, corona effects 
and energy losses take place: 

e 
^ = 100,000 

gives: 

e = 100,000 R or E = 100,000 D, as the voltage where 
the corona begins, and : 

e E 

R = or D = IS the smallest radius 

100,000 100,000 

which can be used, at voltage E, where D is the conductor 

diameter = 2 R, and E is the voltage between the conductors 

= 2 e. 

For instance, wire No. 0000 

D = .46" ; corona effects begin at the voltage E = 100,000 [) 
D^ = 46,000. ' ' 

For 100,000 volts the smallest diameter for which no 
corona effects occur is : 

D= ? =1" 

100,000 


68 GENERAL LECTURES 

In high potential transformers in the coils no corona 
effects may occur, because the diameter of the coil or the thick- 
ness is large enough, but the leads connecting the coils with 
each other and with the outside, if not chosen very large in 
diameter, may give corona effects and so break down. 

In a line or transformer, if one side is grounded, the other 
side has full voltage against ground, and so may give corona 
effects and break down ; while if not grounded, both sides have 
half voltage against ground and so give no corona effect. In 
the first case, the line or transformer so may break down, 
although the potential differences between the terminals are 
no greater than in the second case. 

For instance, in a 100,000 volt transformer or line, from 
each terminal to ground are 50,000 volts, and if the conductor 
diameter is 2 "> ^o corona effects occur. If now one terminal 
is grounded, the other terminal has 100,000 volts to ground 
and so at 2 " diameter gives corona effects, that is, glow and 
streamers which may destroy the insulating material or 
produce high frequency oscillations. 

At very high voltages it is therefore necessary to have 
the system statically balanced or symmetrical, that is, have the 
same potential differences from all the conductors to the 
ground. 

Any electric circuit, and so also the transmission line, 
contains inductance and capacity, and therefore stores energy 
as electromagnetic energy in the magnetic field due to the cur- 
rent, and as electrostatic energy, or electrostatic charge, due to 
the voltage. 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 69 

If: 

e = voltage, C = capacity. 

i = current, L = inductance. 
the electrostatic energy is : 

e*C 
2 
and the electromagnetic energy : 

i'L 
2 

In a high potential transmission line both energies are 
of about the same magnitude, and the energy can therefore see- 
saw between the two forms and thereby produce oscillations 
and surges resulting in the production of high voltages, which 
are not liable to occur in circuits in which one of the forms of 
stored energy is small compared with the other. 

In distribution systems up to 2200 volts and even some- 
what higher, the electrostatic energy is still negligible and 
only the electromagnetic energy appreciable. 

In static machines the electrostatic energy is appreciable, 
but the electromagnetic energy negligible. 

LINES AND TRANSFORMERS 

At voltages above 25,000 step-up and step-down trans- 
formers are always used, which are therefore a part of the high 
potential circuit 

Three-phase is always used in the transmission line. 

Some of the available transformer connections are given 
in Figs. 19 and 20. 

Grounding the neutral of the system has the advantage of 
maintaining static balance and so avoiding oscillations and 
disturbances in case of an accidental static unbalancing, as for 


7© 


GENERAL LECTURES 


^ 


i^i;;;;:;! 


/.) o£ir/i-o£irA 


^) 


o£ir/<~ Y 

r-0£lTA 


a) r-r 


^J 


0£l77l*r 


s) rmsf-WMsr 


tf.j o^e/vasiTA 


r) 


Ttro^^AAse 


frM££'^/fAS0 T 


Fife. 19. Transformer Connections. 


instance, the grounding of one line. It has the disadvantage 
that a ground on one circuit is a short circuit and so shuts 
down the circuit. 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 


71 


In connections i, 4 and 6 no neutral is available for 
grounding and so three separate transformers have to be 
installed in Y connection for getting the neutral. 

In connections 2 and 3 the neutral can be brought out 
from the transformer neutral. 


i? S^X /*/^AS£ OfAr7£r^fC/fL. 


S^^^'^ASS £>OU^^£^ £?£^£.7yf 


Fig. 20. Six-Phase Transformer Connections. 


In the T connection 5 and 7, the neutral is brought out 
from a point at one-third of the teaser transformer winding. 

Assimiing the line properly installed and insulated, break- 
downs may occur, either from mechanical accidents or by high 
voltages appearing in the line. 


^^ GENERAL LECTURES 

HIGH VOLTAGE DISTURBANCES IN 
TRANSMISSION LINES 

These may be: 

A. Of fundamental frequency, that is, the same frequency 
as the alternating current machine circuit. 

B. Some higher harmonic of the generator wave, that is, 
some odd multiple of the generator frequency. 

C. Of frequencies entirely independent of the generator, 
or of a frequency which originates in the circuit, that is, high 
frequency oscillations as arcing grounds, etc. 

If a capacity is in series with an inductance, as the line 
capacity and the line inductance, the capacity reactance and 
the inductive reactance are opposed to each other ; if they hap- 
pened to be equal they would neutralize each other, the current 
would depend on the resistance only and therefore be very 
large, and with this very large current passing through the 
inductance and capacity, the voltage at the inductance and at 
the capacity would be very high. 

For instance, if we have 20,000 volts supplied to a circuit 

having a resistance of 10 ohms and a capacity reactance of 

1000 ohms, then the total impedance of the circuit is 

V^io* + 1000' = 1000 and the current in the circuit 

20,000 

— = 20 amperes. 

1000 

If now in addition to the 10 ohms resistance and 1000 

ohms capacity reactance, the circuit contains 1000 ohms 

inductive reactance, the total reactance of the circuit is 

1000 — 1000 = o ohms, and the impedance is the same as 

c e 
the resistance, or 10 ohms. The current therefore — = ~r = 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 73 

2000 amperes, and the voltage at the capacity therefore is: 
capacity reactance times amperes = 2,000,000 volts, and the 
same voltage exists at the inductive reactance. 

These voltages are far beyond destruction. That is, if 
in a circuit of low resistance and high capacity reactance, a 
high inductive reactance is put in series with the capacity 
reactance, excessive voltages are produced. 

In a transmission line the capacity of the line consumes 
for instance 10% of full load current; that is, full load voltage 
sends only 10% of full load current through the capacity. To 
send full load current through the capacity so would require 10 
times full load voltage. 

With a line reactance of 20%, 20% or ^ of full load 
voltage sends full load current through the inductive reactance, 
while 10 times full load voltage is required by the capacity 
reactance; the capacity reactance therefore is about 50 times 
and therefore cannot build up with it to excessive voltages ; but 
to get resonance with the fundamental frequency requires an 
inductive reactance about 50 times greater than the line 
reactance. 

The only reactance in the system which is large enough to 
build up with the capacity reactance is the open circuit 
reactance of the transformers. This is of about the same size 
as the capacity reactance, smce a transformer at open circuit 
and full voltage takes about 10% of full load current, and the 
capacity reactance also takes about 10% of full load current 

If therefore a high potential coil of a transformer at open 
secondary circuit is connected in series with a transmission 
line, destructive voltages may be produced, by the reactance 
of the transformer building up with the line capacity. 
In those transformer connections in which several high 


74 


GENERAL LECTURES 


potential coils of different transformers are connected between 
the transmission wires, this may occur if the low tension coil 
of one of the transformers accidentally opens and the high 
potential coil of this transformer then acts as inductive react- 
ance in series with the line capacity in the circuit of the other 
transformer. 


~r I 
^ T 


Fife. 21. 

This may occur for instance in transformer connection 2, 
Fig. 19, if as shown in Fig. 21, the low tension coil c opens. 
Then the high tension coil C is an inductive reactance in series 


;c<> 


Fife. 22. 

with the line capacity from 3 to i, energized by transformer 
A; and C is a high inductive reactance in series with the line 
capacity from 3 to 2 in a circuit of voltage B. That is, from 
3 to I and from 3 to 2 excessive voltages are produced. So 
also in T connection, Fig. 2.2, if for instance the low tension 
coil a opens, the corresponding high tension coil A is a high 
inductive reactance in series with the line capacities in a circuit 


LONG DISTANCE TRANSMISSION 75 

of the voltages of the two halves, B and C, of the other trans- 
former, and excessive voltages therefore appear from i to 2 
and from i to 3. 

This danger of excessive voltages by the accidental open- 
ing of a transformer low tension coil does not exist in delta 
connection, since in this always only one transformer connects 
from line to line. It is greatly reduced since the use of triple 
pole switches became general; and is very much less where 
several sets of transformers are used in multiple, since even if 
in one set a low tension coil opens, the other sets maintain the 
voltage triangle. 

Especially dangerous in this respect therefore is the L 
connection No. 6; since in this case, when using two trans- 
formers in open delta, for smaller systems only one set is 
installed and an accident to one of the transformers causes 
excessive voltages between its line and the two other lines. 

The open circuit reactance of the transformer is the only 
reactance high enough to give destructive voltages at gener- 
ator frequency, and in high potential disturbances, the trans- 
former connections should first be carefully investigated to 
see whether this has occurred.
