EIGHTH LECTURE 


GENERATION 

For driving electric generators the following methods are 
available : 

1. The hydraulic turbine in a water power station. 

2. The steam engine. 

3. The steam turbine. 

4. The gas engine. 

COMPARISON OF PRIME MOVERS 

I. The advantages of water power, compared with 
steam power, are: 

a. Very low cost of operation : no fuel, very little attend- 
ance. 

The disadvantages are : 

a. Usually the cost of development and installation is 
far higher than with steam power. 

b. The location of the water power cannot be chosen 
freely, but is fixed by nature; therefore the power cannot be 
used where generated, but a long distance transmission line is 
required. 

c. Usually lower reliability of service, due to the depend- 
ence on a transmission line, and on meteorological conditions : 
the river may run dry in summer, ice interfere with the opera- 
tion in winter. 

The speed of the water in the turbine depends upon the 
head of water, and is approximately, in feet per minute, 
480 Vh, where h is the head, in feet. The peripheral speed of 
the turbine, and so its revolutions, depends upon the speed and 
therefore upon the head of the water. At high heads of 500 to 


102 GENERAL LECTURES 

2000 feet, as are found in the West, the electric generators are 
thus high speed machines, of good economy and moderate size 
and cost. At low heads, however, such as are usual in the East- 
ern States, direct connection to a turbine leads to slow speed 
generators of many poles and large size and cost ; while indir- 
ect driving, by belt or rope, is mechanically undesirable. Very 
low head water powers of less than 20 to 30 feet head there- 
fore are of little value and their development is economical only 
where electric power is valuable. 

Of the two types of turbines, the reaction turbine runs 
approximately at the speed of the water, and the action or 
impulse turbine at half the speed of the water. At the same 
head and thus the same speed of the water, the reaction turbine 
gives higher speed, and is therefore used in water powers of 
low and medium heads, where the speed of the water is low; 
while the impulse (turbine, as the Pelton wheel, is always used 
at very high heads, at which the reaction turbine would give 
too high speeds. 

Where water power is not available, the power has to be 
generated by the combustion of fuel. In this case, a greater 
freedom exists in the choice of the location of the plant ; and 
it is located as near to the place of consumption as considera- 
tions of the cost of property, the availability of condensing 
water for the engines, the facilities of transportation, etc., per- 
mit. Transmission lines therefore are less frequently used, but 
in steam stations of large power, high potential distribution cir- 
cuits of 6600, 11,000 or 13,200 volts, commonly underground 
by cables, are used in supplying electric power from the main 
generating station, to the substations as centres of secondary 
distribution (New York, Chicago, etc.). 

As source of power is available then : 

The steam engine. The steam turbine. The gas engine. 


GENERATION 103 

Comparison of the steam turbine with the steam engine: 
Some of the advantages of the steam turbine over the 
steam engine are : 

a. High efficiency at low loads, and a flatter efficiency- 
curve; that is, the turbine efficiency remains high at partial 
loads, and at overloads, where the steam engine efficiency falls 
off greatly; so that the superiority of the steam turbine in 
efficiency, while marked at rated load, is still far greater at 
partial load, light load and overload. 

b. Smaller size, weight and space occupied. 

c. Uniform rate of rotation, therefore decreased liability 
of hunting of synchronous machines, and decreased necessity 
of heavy foundations to withstand reciprocating strains. 

d. Greater reliability of operation and far less attend- 
ance required. 

The steam turbine reaps a far greater benefit in economy 
than the steam engine from superheat of the steam, and from 
a high vacuum in the condenser. 

Some of the disadvantages of the steam turbine are : 

a. It is a new type of machine, developed only within 
the last ten years, and operating engineers and attendants 
are therefore less familiar with it than with the reciprocating 
engine ; and the steam turbine is replacing the steam engine in 
electric power plants so rapidly, that it is difficult to get suf- 
ficient men to intelligently install and operate them. 

It is therefore of greatest benefit in a steam turbine instal- 
lation that the user familiarize himself with the machine, so 
as not to depend upon the manufacturer in every minute detail, 
but take care of minor troubles just as he would do with a steam 
engine. As the steam turbine is a very simple apparatus this 
is not difficult. 


104 GENERAL LECTURES 

The speed characteristic of the steam turbine is similar 
to that of the constant voltage direct current shunt motor, or 
the polyphase induction motor ; while that of the reciprocating 
steam engine is similar to that of the series motor. That is, 
to produce the same torque, the steam turbine requires approxi- 
mately the same amount of steam, irrespective of the speed; 
therefore its efficiency is highest at a certain speed, or rather 
range of speed, but falls off with the speed ; while the steam 
consumption of the reciprocating engine, at constant torque, is 
approximately proportional to the speed, that is the number of 
times the cylinders are filled per minute. Or in other words, 
the torque per pound of steam used per minute is approximately 
constant and independent of the speed in the turbine (just as 
the torque per volt-ampere is approximately constant for all 
speeds in the induction motor), while in the reciprocating en- 
gine the torque per pound of steam used per minute is approxi- 
mately inversely proportional to the speed, or at least greatly 
increases with decrease of speed (just as in the series motor 
the torque per volt-ampere input increases with decrease of 
speed). 

The steam turbine therefore would not be suitable for 
directly driving a railway train in rapid transit service, but is 
suitable for driving the ship's propeller. 

Just as in the induction motor a series of economical 
speeds can be produced by changing the number of poles, so 
in the siteam turbine a series of economical speeds can be pro- 
duced by changing the number of expansions. For driving 
electrical machinery this, however, is of no importance. 

Comparison of the gas engine with the steam turbine and 
the steam engine. 

The leading and foremost advantage of the gas engine, 
a|;id the feature which gives it the right of existence, is its 


GENERATION 105 

high efficiency. That is, the same amount of coal, converted 
to gas and fed to a good gas engine, gives far more power 
than when burned under the boilers of the most efficient steam 
turbine. The cause is that the gas engine works over a far 
greater temperature range than the steam engine and even the 
steam turbine — although the latter, by its ability to economic- 
ally utilize superheat and high condenser vacuum, gets the 
benefit of a larger temperature range over the steam engine. 

If therefore the gas engine were not so very greatly handi- 
capped in every other respect, it would long have superseded 
the steam engine and the steam turbine. 

The disadvantages of the gas engine in every respeot but 
efficiency are such, however, that in spite of its existence of 
over half a century it has not made a serious impression on the 
industry; while the steam turbine in the last ten years of its 
development has practically replaced the steam engine in large 
electric generating plants. 

The cause of the disadvantages of the gas engine is the 
high maximum temperature and the high maximum pressure 
compared with the mean pressure in the cylinders, which is 
necessary to get the greater temperature range and thus the 
efficiency, therefore is inherent in this type of apparatus. 

The output depends upon the mean pressure in the 
cylinder, which is low; the strains on the maximum pressure, 
which is very high ; and the gas engine therefore must be very 
large, and its moving parts very strong and heavy, for its out- 
put. The impulse due to the rapid pressure change is very 
jerky — almost of the nature of an explosion — and the steadi- 
ness of the rate of rotation is therefore very low, requiring for 
electric driving very heavy flywheels and numerous cylinders. 

Compared with the steam engine, the disadvantages of the 
gas engine so are : 


io6 GENERAL LECTURES 

a. Lower reliability; higher cost of maintenance in 
attendance, repairs, and greater depreciation. 

b. Larger size and space occupation for the same output. 

c. Less ease to start. 

d. In general, lower steadiness of the rate of rotation. 
The advantage of the gas engine is, that it requires no 

boiler plant ; the compensating disadvantage, that it requires a 
gas generating plant. This latter disavantage disappears where 
gas is available as fuel — in the waste gases of blast furnaces of 
steel plants and in the natural gas districts — and in those cases 
gas engines have found their introduction. They have also 
been installed for smaller powers, where low cost of fuel is un- 
essential, but the operation of a steam boiler is objectionable, 
as in isolated plants using city gas or liquid fuel (gasolene, 
etc.). 

In general, however, with the exception of thoise special 
cases, the gas engine does not yet come into consideration in 
the electric power generating station. 

ELECTRIC GENERATORS 

In general, considerations of economy make it desirable 
to generate the electric power in the form in which it is used. 
In most cases, however, this is not feasible, but a higher 
voltage or even a different form of power (alternating instead 
of direct) is necessary in the generating station than that re- 
quired by the user, to enable transmission and distribution; 
and then usually three-phase alternating current is generated. 

I. For isolated plants, and in general distribution of such 
small extent as to be within range of 220 volt distribution, 
220 volt direct current generators are used, operating a three- 
wire system, either two no volt machines, supplying the 
two sides of the system, or 220 volt machines, deriving the 


GENERATION 


107 


neutral by equalizer machines, or by connection to a storage 
battery, or by compensator and collector rings on the 220 volt 
generator. That is, two diametrically opposite (electrically) 
points of the armature winding are connected to collector 
rings, (so giving an alternaiting current voltage on those col- 
lector rings), an alternating current compensator (transformer 
with a single winding) is connected between the collector rings, 
and the neutral brought out from the center of the compen- 
sator, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 24. This arrange- 
ment is now most commonly used. 


Fig. 24 

For direct current distribution in larger cities, such 
generating stations have practically disappeared, and have been 
replaced by converter substations, receiving power from a 
6600, 11,000 or 13,200 volts, and usually 25 cycles. 

2. For street railway, 600 volt direct current generators 
main generating station, as three-phase alternating current of 
are still used to a considerable extent, where the railway 
system is of moderate extent. In large railway systems, and 
roads covering greater distances, as interurban trolley lines, 


io8 GENERAL LECTURES 

direct generation of 600 volts direct current is also disappear- 
ing before the railway converter substation, receiving power 
as three-phase alternating from transmission lines or high 
voltage distribution cables. 

3. For general distribution by alternating current, with 
a 2200 volt primary system, direct generation is still largely 
used, as the use of 2200 volt permits the system to cover a 
very large territory, and substations are mainly used only 
where the power can be derived from a long distance trans- 
mission line, or where the 2200 volt distribution is only a part 
of a large system of electric generation; as in the suburban 
diistribution of large cities, using converter substations for the 
interior. In this case, where the transmission line or the main 
generating station is at 60 cycles, large station transformers 
are used for the supply of the 2200 volt distribution; where 
the power supply is at 25 cycles, either frequency converters, 
or motor generators change to 60 cycles, 2200 volts. 

4. For special use, as for electrochemical work, where the 
electric power is generated directly, different voltages, etc., 
may be used to suit the requirements. 

Where the power cannot be generated in the form in 
which it is used, and that is the case in all larger systems, three- 
phase alternators are almost universally used. 

The single-phase system has the disadvantage that single- 
phase induction and synchronous motors and converters are 
inferior to polyphase machines, and single-phase alternators 
larger and less efficient, and for lighting, where single-phase 
is preferable, single-phase lighting circuits can be operated 
from polyphase alternators. 

Two-phase also is gradually going out of use, since it 
offers no advantage over the three-phase, and the three-phase is 


GENERATION 109 

preferable for transmission, requiring only three conductors, 
while two-phase requires four. 

In polyphase alternators the flow of power is constant, 
that is, at any moment adding the power of all phases gives the 
same value, while in single-phase alternators the power is pul- 
sating. 

In a polyphase machine the armature reaction also is con- 
stant, in a single-phase machine, pulsating; in the latter 
therefore, in machines of very large armature reaction, as 
turbo-alternators, pulsations of the magnet field, and thereby 
loss in efficiency, and heating may result. 

An alternator has armature reaction and self-induction. 

The armature reaction is the magnetic action of the arma- 
ture current on the field, that is, the armature current demag- 
netizes or magnetizes the field according to its phase, and so 
lowers or raises the voltage. Armature reaction therefore is 
expressed in ampere turns. 

Self-induction is the action of the armature current in 
producing magnetism in the armature, which magnetism does 
not go through the field. This magnetism induces an e. m. f. 
in the armature, which opposes or assists the e. m. f . produced 
by the field magnetism, according to the phase of the armature 
current, and so lowers or raises the voltage. Self-induction, or 
"armature reactance" therefore is expressed in ohms. 

Armature reaction and self-induction therefore act in the 
same manner, lowering the voltage with lagging and raising 
the voltage with leading current. 

In calculating alternators, either the armature reaction 
and the self-induction can both be considered, which makes the 
calculation more complicated; or the armature reaction may 
be neglected and the self-induction made so much larger as to 
allow for the armature reaction. This self-induction is then 


no GENERAL LECTURES 

called the "synchronous reactance" and, combined with the 
armature resistance, the "synchronous impedance" of the ma- 
chine. Or the self-induction may be neglected and only the 
armature reaction considered, but which is increased to allow 
for the self-induction. 

The last way (armature reaction), is used in designing 
machines; the second way (synchronous reactance) in calcula- 
tions with machines and systems. 

In the momentary short circuit current of alternators, 
however, the armature reaction and the self-induction must be 
considered separately, since they act differently. 

In the moment of short circuiting an alternator, the self- 
induction acts immediately in limiting the current, but not so 
the armature reaction, because it takes time before the arma- 
ture current demagnetizes the field, that is, the field exciting 
winding acts as a short circuited secondary around the field 
poles, and retards the decrease of field magnetism resulting 
from the demagnetizing action of the armature current by 
inducing a current in the field winding, which tends to main- 
tain the field magetism. 

Therefore in the first moment after the short circuit 
the armature current is limited by self-induction only, and 
is therefore much larger than afterwards, when self-induction 
and armature reaction both act. 

In machines of low armature reaction and high self- 
induction, as high frequency alternators, the momentary short 
circuit current is not much larger than the permanent short 
circuit current. In machines of low self-induction, that is, of 
a well distributed armature winding, but high armature reac- 
tion, (that is, very large output per pole, as in steam turbine 
alternators,) the momentary short circuit current may be many 


GENERATION , in 

times greater than the permanent value of the short circuit cur- 
rent, which is reached after a few seconds. 

In the moment of short circuiting such an alternator, the 
field current rises to several times its normal value, and becomes 
pulsating, of double frequency. Gradually the armature cur- 
rent and the field current die down to their normal values. By 
inserting non-inductive resistance in the field circuit of the 
alternator, the field current, which is induced in the moment of 
short circuit, can be forced to die out more rapidly, and the 
armature short circuit current made thereby to reach its final 
value more quickly, that is, the duration of the excessive 
momentary short circuit current may be reduced. 

By inserting reactance, as choke coils or reactive coils, in 
the armature circuit of the alternator, its momentary short cir- 
cuit current can be reduced, and this is advisable in such 
machines in which the current otherwise would reach danger- 
ous values. Since the regulation of such alternators mainly 
depends upon the armature reaction, which is very large com- 
pared with the self-induction, even a considerable external self- 
induction inserted as reactive coil for limiting the momentary 
short circuit current does not much increase the combined 
effect of armature reaction and self-induction ; that is, does not 
seriously affect the regulation.
