SECOND LECTURE 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 


DIRECT CURRENT DISTRIBUTION 


HE TYPICAL direct current distribution is the system 
of feeders and mains, as devised by Edison, and since 
used in all direct current distributions. It is shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2. The conductors are usually under- 


T 


f2a 

^120 

W^ 
-^\\ 

ft. 

1 

1 

/30 

i 
1 
\30 

fZOT 

#1 

/ze? 

/30 

1 
1 

A 

^_.. 

\ 
\ 

ItfO 

\ 

Fife. 2 

24 GENERAL LECTURES 

ground, as direct current systems are used only in large cities. 
A system of three-wire conductors, called the "mains" is laid 
in the streets of the city, shown diagrammatically by the 
heavily drawn lines. Commonly, conductors of one million 
circular mil section (that is, a copper section which as solid 
round conductor would have a diameter of i") are used for the 
outside conductors, the "positive" and the "negative" con- 
ductor; and a conductor of half this size for the middle or 
"neutral" conductor. The latter is usually grounded, as pro- 
tection against fire risk, etc. Conductors of more than one 
million circular mils are not used, but when the load exceeds 
the capacity of such conductors, a second main is laid in 
the same street. A number of feeders, shown by dotted lines 
in Fig. 2, radiate from the generating station or converter 
substations, and tap into the mains at numerous points ; potential 
wires run back from the mains to the stations, and so allow of 
measuring, in the station, the voltage at the different points of 
the distribution system. All the customers are connected to the 
mains, but none to the feeders. The mains and feeders are 
arranged so that no appreciable voltage drop takes place in the 
mains, but all drop of voltage occurs in the feeders ; and as no 
customers connect to the feeders, the only limit to the voltage 
drop in the feeders is efficiency of distribution. The voltage at 
the feeding points into the mains is kept constant by varying 
the voltage supply to the feeders with the changes of the load on 
the mains. This is done by having a number of outside 
bus bars in the station, as shown diagrammatically in Pig. 3, 
differing from each other in voltage, and connecting feeders 
over from bus bar to bus bar, with the change of load. 

For instance, in a 2 x 120 voltage distribution, the station 
may have, in addition to the neutral bus bar zero, three positive 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 


25 


bus bars i, i', i", and three negative bus bars 2, 2', 2", differing 
respectively from the neutral bus by 120, 130 and 140 volts, 
as shown in Fig. 3. At light load, when the drop of voltage 
in the feeders is negligible, the feeders connect to the busses 
I, o, 2 of 120 volts. When the load increases, some of the 
feeders are shifted over, by transfer bus bars, to the 130 volt 
busbars i' and 2'; with still further increase of load, more 
feeders are connected over to 130 volts; then some feeders are 
connected to the 140 volt bus bars, i" and 2", and so, by varying 


the voltage supply to the feeders, the voltage at the mains can 
be maintained constant with an accuracy depending on the 
number of bus bars. It is obvious that a shift of a feeder from 
one voltage to another does not mean a corresponding voltage 
change on the main supplied by it, but rather a shift of load 
between the feeders, and so a readjustment of the total voltage 
in the territory near the supply point of the feeder. For 
instance, if by the potential wires a drop of voltage below 120 
volts is registered in the main at the connection point of feeder 
A in Fig. 2, and this feeder then shifted from the supply 


26 GENERAL LECTURES 

voltage 130 to 140, the current in the main near A, which 
before flowed towards A as minimum voltage point, reverses 
in direction, flows away from A, the load on feeder A and there- 
fore increases, and the drop of voltage in A increases, while the 
load on the adjacent feeders decreases, and thereby their drop of 
voltage decreases, with the result of bringing up the voltage in 
the mains at the feeder A and all adjacent feeders. This inter- 
linkage of feeders therefore allows a regulation of voltage in 
the mains, far closer than the number of voltages available in 
the station. 

The different bus bars in the station are supplied with their 
voltage by having different generators or converters in the sta- 
tion operate at different voltages, and with increasing load on 
the station, and consequent increasing demand of higher volt- 
age by the feeders, shift machines from lower to higher voltage 
bus bars, inversely with decreasing load; or the different bus 
bars are operated through boosters, or by connection with the 
storage battery reserve, etc. 

In addition to feeders and mains, tie feeders usually con- 
nect the generating station or substation with adjacent stations, 
so that during periods of light load, or in case of breakdown, 
a station may be shut down altogether and supplied from 
adjacent stations by tie feeders. Such tie feeders also permit 
most stations to operate without storage battery reserve, that 
is, to concentrate the storage batteries in a few stations, from 
which in case of a breakdown of the system, the other stations 
are supplied over the tie feeders. 

ALTERNATING CURRENT DISTRIBUTION 

The system of feeders and mains allows the most perfect 
voltage regulation in the distributing mains. It is however 
applicable only to direct current distribution in a territory of 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 27 

very concentrated load, as in the interior of a large city, since 
the independent voltage regulation of each one of numerous 
feeders is economically permissible only where each feeder 
represents a large amount of power; with alternating cur- 
rent systems, the inductive drop forbids the concentration of 
such large currents in a single conductor. That is, conductors 
of one million circular mils cannot be used economically in 
an alternating current system. 

The resistance of a conductor is inversely proportional to 
the size or section of the conductor, hence decreases rapidly 
with increasing current: a conductor of one million circular 
mils is one-tenth the resistance of a conductor of 100,000 
circular mils, and so can carry ten times the direct current 
with the same voltage drop. The reactance of a conductor, 
however, and so the voltage consumed by self-induction, de- 
creases only very little with the increasing size of a conductor, 
as seen from the table of resistances and reactances of 
conductors. A wire No. 000 B & S G is eight times the section 
of a wire No. 7, and therefore one-eighth (the resistance; 
but the wire No. 000 has a reactance of .109 ohms per 1000 
feet, the wire No. 7 has a reactance of .133 oms, or only 1.22 
times as large. Hence, while in the wire No. 7, the reactance, 
at 60 cycles, is only .266 times the resistance and therefore not 
of serious importance, in a wire No. 000 the reactance is 1.76 
times the resistance, and the latter conductor is likely to give 
a voltage drop far in excess of the ohmic resistance drop. The 
ratio of reactance to resistance therefore rapidly increases 
with increasing size of conductor, and for alternating currents, 
large conductors cannot therefore be used economically where 
close voltage regulation is required. 

With alternating currents it therefore is preferable to 
use several smaller conductors in multiple : two conductors of 


28 GENERAL LECTURES 

No. I in multiple have the same resistance as one conductor 
of No. ooo; but the reactance of one conductor No. ooo is .109 
ohms, and so 1.88 times as great as the reactance of two con- 
ductors of No. I in multiple, which latter is half that of one 
conductor No. i, or .058 ohms, provided that the two con- 
ductors are used as separate circuits. 

In alternating current low tension distribution, the size 
of the conductor and so the current per conductor, is limited 
by the self -inductive drop, and alternating current low tension 
networks are therefore of necessity of smaller size than those 
of direct current distribution. 

As regards economy of distribution, this is not a serious 
objection, as the alternating current transformer and primary 
distribution permits the use of numerous secondary circuits. 

In alternating current systems, a primary distribution 
system of 2200 volts is used, feeding step-down transformers. 

The different arrangements are — 

a. A separate transformer for each customer. This is 
necessary in those cases where the customers are so far apart 
from each other that they cannot be reached by the same low 
tension or secondary circuit ; every alternating current system 
therefore has at least a number of instances where individual 
transformers are used. 

This is the most uneconomical arrangement. It requires 
the use of small transformers, which are necessarily less 
efficient and more expensive per kilowatt, than large trans- 
formers. The transformer must l3e built to carry, within its 
overload capacity, all the lamps installed by the customer, 
since all the lamps may be used occasionally. Usually, 
however, only a small part of the lamps are in use, and 
those only for a small part of the day ; so that the average 
load on the transformer is a very small part of its capacity. 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 29 

As the core loss in the transformer continues whether the 
transformer is loaded or not, but is not paid for by the cus- 
tomer, the economy of the arrangement is very low ; and so it 
can be understood that in the early days, where this arrange- 
ment was generally used, the financial results of most alternat- 
ing current distributions were very discouraging. 

Assuming as an instance a connected load of twenty 16 
candle power lamps — low efficiency lamps, of 60 watts per 
lamp, since (the voltage regulation cannot be very perfect — 
allowing then in cases of all lamps being used, an overload of 
100%, which is rather beyond safe limits, and permissible only 
on the assumption that this load will occur very rarely, and for 
a short time — the transformer would have 600 watt ratting. 
Assuming a core loss of 4%, this gives a continuous power 
consumption of 24 watts. Usually probably only one or two 
lamps will be burning, and these only a few hours per day, 
so that the use of two lamps, at an average — summer and 
winter — of three hours per day, would probably be a fair 
example of many such cases. Two lamps or 120 watts, for 
three hours per day, give an average power of 15 watts, 
which is paid for by the customer, while the continuous loss in 
the transformer is 24 watts ; so that the all year efficiency, or the 
ratio of the power paid for by the customer, to the power con- 
sumed by the transformer, is only ^^ , ^4 or 38%. 

By connecting several adjacent customers to the same 
transformer, the conditions immediately become far more 
favorable. It is extremely improbable that all the customers 
will burn all their lamps at the same time, the more so, the 
greater the number of customers is, which are supplied from 
the same transformer. It therefore becomes unnecessary to 


30 GENERAL LECTURES 

allow a transformer capacity capable of operating all the con- 
nected load. The larger transformer also has a higher 
effiicency. Assuming therefore as an instance, four customers 
of 20 lamps connected load each. The average load would be 
about 8 lamps. Assuming even one customer burning all 20 
lamps, it is not probable that the other customers together 
would at this time burn more than 10 to 15 lamps, and a trans- 
former carrying 30 to 35 lamps at overload would probably 
be sufficient. A 1500 watt transformer would therefore be 
larger than necessary. At 3% coreloss, this gives a constant 
loss of 45 watts, while an average load of 8 lamps for 3 hours 
per day gives a useful output of 60 watts, or an all year 
efficiency of nearly 60%, while a 1000 watt transformer would 
give an all year efficiency of 67%. 

This also illustrates that in smaller transformers a low 
coreloss is of utmost importance, while the rr loss is of very 
secondary importance, since it is appreciable only at heavy load, 
and therefore affects the all year efficiency very little. 

When it becomes possible to connect a large number of 
customers to a secondary main fed from one large trans- 
former the connected load ceases to be of moment in the trans- 
former capacity ; the transformer capacity is determined by the 
average load, with a safe margin for overloads; in this case, 
good all year efficiencies can be reached. 

Economical alternating current distribution therefore re- 
quires the use of secondary distribution mains of as large an 
extent as possible, fed by large transformers. The distance, 
however, to which a transformer can supply secondary current, 
is rather limited by the inductive drop of voltage ; therefore, for 
supplying secondary mains, transformers of larger size than 30 
kw. are rarely used, but rather several transformers are em- 
ployed, to feed in the same main at different points. 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 


31 


Extending the secondary mains still further by the use 
of several transformers feeding into the same mains, or, as it 
may be considered, inter-connecting the secondary mains of the 
different transformers, we arrive at a system somewhat similar 
to the direct current system : a low tension distribution system 
of 220 volts three-wire mains, with a system of feeders tapping 
into it at a number of points, as shown in Fig. 4. These feeders 


Fife. 4. Alternating Current Distribution with Secondary 
Mains and Primary Feeders. 


are primary feeders of 2200 volts, connecting to .the mains 
through step-down transformers. In such a system, by vary- 
ing the voltage impressed upon the primary feeders, a voltage 
regulation of the system similar to that of direct current dis- 
tribution becomes feasible. Such an arrangement has these 
advantages over the direct current system: the drop in the 
feeders is very much lower, due to their higher voltage; and 


32 GENERAL LECTURES 

that the feeder voltage can be regulated by alternating current 
feeder regulators or compensators, that is, stationary structures 
similar to the transformer. It has, however, the disadvantage 
that, due to the self-induction of the mains, each feeding point 
can supply current over a far shorter distance than with 
direct current, and the interchange of current between 
feeders, by which the load can be shifted and apportioned 
between the feeders, is far less. 

As a result, it is difficult to reach as good voltage regu- 
lation with the same attention to the system; and since 
this arrangement has the disadvantage that any break- 
down in the secondary system or in a transformer may 
involve the entire system, this system of inter-connected 
secondary mains is rarely used for alternating current 
distribution, but the secondary mains are usually kept 
separate. That is, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 5, a 
number of separate secondary mains are fed by large trans- 
formers from primary feeders, and usually each primary 
feeder connects to a number of transformers. Where the 
distances are considerable, and the voltage drop in the primary 
feeders appreciable, voltage regulation of the feeders becomes 
necessary; and in this case, to get good voltage regulation in the 
system, attention must be given to the arrangements of the 
feeders and mains. That is, all the transformers on the same 
feeder should be at about the same distance from the station, 
so that the voltage drop between the transformers on the same 
feeder is negligible ; and the nature of the load on the secondary 
mains fed by the same feeder should be about as nearly the 
same as feasible, so that all the mains on the same feeder are 
about equally loaded. It would therefore be undesirable for 
voltage regulation, to connect, for instance, a main feeding a 


GENERAL DISTRIBUTION 


33 


residential section to the same feeder as a main feeding a 
business district or an office building. 


f 


A\ 


Fife. 5. Typical Altematlnfe Current Distribution. 

In a well designed alternating current distribution system, 
that is, a system using secondary distribution mains as far as 
feasible, the all year efficiency is about the same as with the 
direct current system. In such an alternating current system, 


34 GENERAL LECTURES 

the efficiency at heavy load is higher, and at light load lower, 
than in the direct current system ; in this respect the alternating 
current system has the advantage over the direct current 
system, since at the time of heavy load the power is more 
valuable than at light load.
