SIXTH LECTURE 


HIGHER HARMONICS OF THE 
GENERATOR WAVE 

mHE open circuit reactance of the transformer is the only 
reactance high enough to give resonance with the line 
capacity at fundamental frequency. 
All other reactances are too low for this. 
Since, however, the inductive reactance increases and the 
capacity reactance decreases proportionally to the frequency, 
the two reactances come nearer together for higher frequency; 
that is, for the higher harmonics of the generator wave, and 
for some of the higher harmonics of the generator wave 
resonance rise of voltage so may occur between the line 
capacity and the circuit inductance. 

The origin and existence of higher harmonics therefore 
bears investigation in transformers, transmlission lines and 
cable systems. 

ORIGIN OF HIGHER HARMONICS 

Higher harmonics may originate in synchronous machines, 
as generators, synchronous motors and converters, and in 
transformers. 

These two classes of higher harmonics are very different. 
The former have constant potential character; the latter, con- 
stant current character; their cure and prevention there- 
fore must be different, and the method of elimination of one 
may be very harmful with the other type of harmonics. For 
instance, the voltage produced by a constant current harmonic 
as coming from a transformer is eliminated by short circuit 
Short circuiting a generator harmonic, however, gives large 


8o GENERAL LECTURES 

short circuit currents, due to the constant potential character, 
and is therefore dangerous. 

HIGHER HARMONICS OF SYNCHRONOUS 
MACHINES 

In synchronous machines, as alternating current genera- 
tors, the higher harmonics are : 

At No Load 

I St. The distribution of magnetism in the air gap 
depends on the shape of the field poles; it is not a sine wave; 
neither is the e. m. f . induced by it in an armature a sine wave. 

Since there are a number of conductors in series on the 
armature, the voltage wave is more evened out than that of a 
single conductor ; but still it is not a sine wave, that is, contains 
harmonics of which the third is the lowest. 

2nd. The change of magnetic flux by the passage of open 
armature slots over the field pole produces harmonics of 
e. m. f . ; that is, when a large open armature slot stands in front 
of the field pole, the magnetic reluctance is high ; the magnetism 
is lower than when no slot is in front of the field pole ; that is, 
by the passage of the armature slots the field magnetism pul- 
sates, the more so the larger the slots and the fewer they are. 

If there are n slots per pole, this produces the two har- 
monics 2n — I and 2n + i. 

At Load 

3rd. The armature reaction of a single-phase machine 
pulsates between zero at zero current and a maximum at maxi- 
mum current. 

The resultant armature reaction of a pol3rphase machine 
is constant, but locally there is a pulsation making as many 
cycles per pole as there are phases. 


HARMONICS OF GENERATOR WAVE 8i 

Since the field magnetism under load is due to the com- 
bination of field excitation and armature reaction, the pulsa- 
tion of armature reaction therefore causes a pulsation of field 
magnetism, and thereby higher harmonics of the e. m. f . wave. 

If m == number of phases, the higher harmonics : 2m — i 
and 2m + i are produced. 

4th. The terminal voltage under load is the resultant of 
the induced e. m. f, and the e. m. f. consumed by the reactance 
of the armature circuit ; that is, the reactance produced by the 
magnetic flux produced by the armature current in the arma- 
ture iron. This armature reactance is not constant, but peri- 
odically varies, more or less, with double frequency; that is, 
when the armature coil is in front of the field pole its magnetic 
circuit is different than when it is between the field poles, and 
the reactance therefore is different. 

This pulsation of armature reactance produces the third 
harmonic, since it is of double frequency. 

The most common and prominent harmonic so is the third 
harmonic in a synchronous machine. 

These harmonics of synchronous machines are induced 
e. m. f's, that is, constant potential or approximately so. 

HIGHER HARMONICS OF TRANSFORMERS 
In a transformer the wave of e. m. f. depends on that of 
the magnetism and vice versa. That is, with a sine wave of 
e. m. f., the magnetism must also be a sine wave, and if the 
magnetism is not a sine wave, but contains higher harmonics, 
the e. m. f. is not a sine wave, but contains the harmonics 
induced by the harmonics of magnetism. 

The exciting current of the transformer depends on tht 
magnetism by the hysteresis cycle; if the magnetism is a sine 
wave, the exciting current therefore cannot be a sine wave, but 


82 


GENERAL LECTURES 


must contain higher harmonics- — mainly the third harmonic, 
which reaches 20 to 30% of the fundamental, or even more at 
saturation. 


Fig. 23. 


In a transformer, e. m. f. and exciting current therefore 
cannot both be sine waves, but a sine wave of e. m. f. requires 
an exciting current containing a third harmonic; and a sine 
wave of exciting current in a transformer or reactive coil thus 
produces a third harmonic of e. m. f. 

If therefore in a transformer the third harmonic is sup- 
pressed, and if this third harmonic should have been 20% of 
the fundamental, then its suppression produces a third har- 
monic of magnetism of 20% in the opposite direction. 
A third harmonic of magnetism, however, of 20%, induces a 
third harmonic of e. m. f . of 3 x 20 = 60% ; the e. m. f. being 
proportional to magnetism and frequency. 


HARMONICS OF GENERATOR WAVE 83 

The third harmonic of exciting current is positive at the 
maximum of magnetism, and the third harmonic of magnetism 
is negative at the maximum, hence is zero and rising at the zero 
of the magnetism ; and at this moment the e. m. f . induced by 
the third harmonic and by the fundamental therefore are both 
maxima and in the same direction, that is, add. The suppres- 
sion of the third harmonic of exciting current thus produces a 
very high third harmonic of e. m. f., which greatly increases 
the maximum e. m. f. ; that is, the e. m. f. wave is very low for 
a large part of the cycle and then rises to a very high peak, as 
shown by Fig. 23 ; and the maximum e. m. f . may exceed that 
of a sine wave by 50% and more, thus giving high insulation 
stress and the possibility of resonance voltages. 

EFFECTS OF HIGHER HARMONICS 

In a three-phase system the three phases are 120° apart, 
and their third harmonics are 3 x 120° = 360° apart, that is, in 
phase with each, and for the third harmonic the three-phase 
system therefore is a single-phase system. 

In a balanced three-phase system, the third harmonics can 
not exist in the voltages between the lines and in the line 
currents, if there is no return over the neuitral. The three 
voltages between lines, from i to 2, 2 to 3, and 3 to i, must add 
up to zero; but since the third harmonics would be in phase 
with each other, they would not add up to zero, therefore they 
cannot exist. The three currents, if there is no return over the 
neutral or the ground, must add up to zero; and since their 
third harmonics must be in phase with each other, they must 
be absent. In a balanced three-phase system, third harmonics 
can exist only in the voltage from line to neutral or Y voltage, 
in the current from line to line or delta current, and in the 


84 GENERAL LECTURES 

line current only if there is a neutral return or ground return 
to the generator neutral or transformer neutral. 

In a three-phase generator, if the e. m. f . of one phase con- 
tains a third harmonic, as is usually the case, then by connect- 
ing the three phases in delta connection, the third harmonics 
of the generator e. m. f.'s are short circuited and so produce a 
triple frequency current circulating in the generator delta. 
This triple frequency circulating current can be measured by 
connecting an ammeter in one corner of the generator delta, 
and the sum of voltages of the three third harmonics can be 
measured by putting a voltmeter in a corner of the generator 
delta. This local current in the generator winding is the triple 
frequency voltage divided by the generator impedance (the 
stationary impedance, at triple frequency, but not the syn- 
chronous impedance, since the latter includes armature reac- 
tion). In generators of low impedance or close regulation, 
as turbine alternators, this local current may be far more than 
full load current ; delta connection of generator windings there- 
fore is unsafe. As a result, generator windings are almost 
always connected in Y, Even with delta connection of gener- 
ator windings no triple frequency appears at the terminals, 
since its voltage disappears by short circuit. 

If the generator winding is connected in Y, the triple 
frequency voltages from terminal to neutral are in phase with 
each other; that is, in a three-phase Y connected generator, a 
single-phase voltage of triple frequency exists between the 
neutral and all three terminals, and the neutral therefore is not 
a true neutral. Between the lines no triple frequency voltage 
exists, since from terminal to neutral and from neutral to the 
other terminal the two third harmonics are in opposition and 
so neutralize. i ' I I ^ 


HARMONICS OF GENERATOR WAVE 85 

This third harmonic between generator neutral and line 
must be kept in mind, since when large it may produce danger- 
ous voltages by resonance with the line capacity. 

When the generator neutral is grounded, the potential 
difference from line to ground is not line voltage divided by 
V3, that is, the true Y voltage of the system ; but superimposed 
upon it is this single-phase triple frequency voltage; and the 
voltage from line to ground, especially its maximum, may be 
greatly increased, thus increasing the insulation strain. For 
this single-phase voltage all three lines go together, and so may 
cause static induction on other circuits, as telephone lines. A 
circuit of this single-phase triple frequency voltage then exists 
frcmi the generator neutral over the inductance of all three 
generator circuits in multiple, and over the capacity of all three 
lines to ground, back to the generator neutral ; that is, we have 
capacity and inductance in series in a circuit of the triple har- 
monic, and if capacity and inductance are high enough, we 
may get a dangerous voltage rise. 

In this case of grounded generator neutral, if the neutral 
of the Y connected step-down transformers is grounded also, 
and the low tension side of these transformers connected in Y, 
the third harmonic of the generator has no path; the cur- 
rent produced by it would have to return over the open circuit 
reactance of the step-down transformer, and is limited there- 
by to a negligible value. 

If, however, the secondaries of the step-down trans- 
formers are connected in delta, so that the third harmonic can 
circulate in the secondary delta, the third harmonic can flow 
through the transformer primary by inducing an opposite cur- 
rent in the secondary; in this case the step-down trans- 
former short circuits the third harmonic of the generator. 
Grounding the primary neutral of step-down transformers 


86 GENERAL LECTURES 

with grounded generator neutral therefore is permissible only 
if the transformer secondaries are also connected in Y. With 
delta connected transformer secondaries, however, it is not 
safe to ground the generator neutral and transformer neutral ; 
since this produces a triple frequency current in generator, line 
and transformer ; and even if the generator reactance is so high 
that the generator is not harmed by this current, it may burn 
out at the transformer, and probably will do so if the trans- 
former is small compared with the generator. 

This therefore is a case where delta connection of the 
transformer secondaries does not eliminate the trouble from 
the third harmonic, but makes it worse. 

The triple frequency voltage from line to ground would 
be eliminated by short circuiting it in this manner, by Y delta 
connection of step-down transformer with grounded generator 
and transformer neutral, and static induction on other circuits 
so would disappear; but we get magnetic induction from the 
three triple frequency single-phase currents which now flow 
over the lines to the ground. 

If the generator neutral is not gfrounded, it is safe to 
ground transformer neutrals. With ungrounded generator 
neutral, a triple frequency voltage can be measured by volt- 
meter, which then appears between generator neutral and 
ground; this voltage under unfavorable conditions, may give 
insulation strains in the generator by resonance rise; in the 
circuit from generator neutral over triple frequency voltage, 
generator inductance, capacity from line to ground and capac- 
ity from ground to generator winding in series. 

In this case the capacity is much lower and the power 
therefore much less, that is, less danger exists. 

When running two or more three-phase generators in 
parallel, with grounded neutrals : 


HARMONICS OF GENERATOR WAVE 87 

a. If the generators have different third harmonics, these 
harmonics are short circuited from neutral over generator to 
the other generator and back to neutral; a triple frequency 
current thus flows between the generators, that is, the current 
between the generators can never be made to disappear. 

That is, for the third harmonic, the two generators are 
two single-phase machines of different voltage, having the 
neutral as one terminal and the three three-phase terminals as 
the other single-phase terminal. 

b. With two identical generators running in multiple, if 
the excitation is identically the same, no current flows between 
the grounded neutrals. If the excitation of the two generators 
is different, one is over-excited the other is under-excited 
(that is, one carries leading, the other lagging current) then a 
triple frequency current flows between the neutrals of identical 
generators. Since in parallel operation the terminal voltages 
are in phase, if by difference of excitation the two terminal 
voltages have a different lag behind the induced e. m. f /s, the 
third harmonics, which lag three times as much as the funda- 
mentals, cannot be in phase in the two machines; and thus 
triple frequency current flows between the machines. 

In machines of very low reactance as turbo-alternators, 
even small differences in excitation of identical machines with 
grounded neutral may thus cause very large neutral currents. 

In parallel operation of three-phase machines with 
grounded neutral, machines of different wave shapes frequently 
cannot be run together at all without excessive neutral currents, 
and the ground has to be taken off of one of the machine typts. 

Even with identical machines, such care has to be taken 
in keeping the same excitation that it is frequently undesirable 
to ground all the neutrals, but only the neutral of one machine 
is grounded and the other machine neutrals are left isolated. In 


88 GENERAL LECTURES 

this case, provisions must be made to ground the neutral of 
some other machine, if the first one is out of service. The 
best way is, when grounding generator neutrals, to ground 
through a separate resistance for every generator and to 
choose this resistance so high as to limit the neutral current, 
but still low enough so that in case of a ground on one phase, 
enough current flows over the neutral to open the circuit 
breaker of the grounded phase. 

The use of a resistance in the generator neutral is very 
desirable also, since it eliminates the danger of a high 
frequency oscillation between line and ground through the 
generator reactance in the path of the third harmonic, by 
damping the oscillation in the resistance. For this reason, 
the resistance should be non-inductive. To ground the gener- 
ator neutral through a reactance is very dangerous since it 
intensifies the danger of a resonance voltage rise. 

In grounding the generator neutral, special care is neces- 
sary to get perfect contact, since an arc or loose contact would 
generate a high frequency in the circuit of the third harmonic 
and so may lead to a higher frequency oscillation between line 
and ground.
