XV 

THE  AMERICAN   NATION 

CO-OPERATIVE  industrial  organization 
presupposes  racial  unity.  There  can  be 
no  co-operation  as  long  as  there  is  racial  strife 
and  antagonism  within  the  nation.  The  Ameri- 
can nation  was  formed— rather  is  being  formed, 
since  it  is  still  in  the  formation  period — by  the 
commingling  of  the  Anglo-Saxon,  Teuton,  Celt, 
Slav,  and  Mediterranean.  None  of  these  races 
is  in  the  majority  or  even  in  such  a  large  mi- 
nority that  it  could  expect  to  have  its  character, 
its  viewpoints,  habits,  and  temperament  pre- 
dominate in  the  resultant  race.  The  white  pop- 
ulation of  the  United  States  to-day  probably 
comprises  about  30  to  35  per  cent,  of  Anglo- 
Saxon  origin  (English,  Scotch,  etc.),  about  30 
per  cent,  of  Teuton  origin  (German,  Dutch, 
Scandinavian,  etc.),  15  per  cent,  of  Celtic  origin 
(Irish),  and  20  to  25  per  cent.  Slav  and  Mediter- 

188 


THE  AMERICAN  NATION 

ranean.  Of  the  latter,  the  latest  immigrants, 
many  are  not  yet  citizens. 

The  American  race  thus  cannot  be  Anglo- 
Saxon,  or  Teuton,  or  Irish,  or  Slav,  or  Latin, 
but  nuist  have  characteristics  of  all  these  races, 
and  to  talk  about  "blood  is  thicker  than  water," 
and  apply  this  to  "our  British  cousins,"  or  speak 
of  Germany  as  "Fatherland,"  or  of  our  country 
as  a  "Greater  Ireland,"  this  is  not  American 
citizenship,  but  is  racial  sectarianism,  and  as 
such  to  be  condemned  as  reprehensible,  since  it 
retards  the  bringing  about  of  the  racial  unity 
which  is  the  first  and  fundamental  requirement 
of  a  stable  nation. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  recognized  that 
the  Anglo-Saxon,  or,  more  correctly  speaking, 
the  English,  have  an  exceptional  position  in  our 
race,  as  the  original  and  oldest  constituent. 
While  all  races  contributed  in  the  early  coloni- 
zation of  the  Atlantic  coast,  nevertheless  the 
British  were  so  much  in  the  majority  that  in 
the  Colonial  days,  and  even  still  in  the  first 
part  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  United 
States  were  essentially  Anglo-Saxon,  that  is,  the 
citizens  of  British  descent  were  in  the  majority. 
But  the  great  German  and  Irish  immigration  of 
the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the 

18!) 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

tendency  of  the  descendants  of  the  early  Col- 
onists toward  race  suicide  changed  this,  and 
America  is  not  Anglo-Saxon  any  more,  but  is  a 
mixed  race  in  formation.  What  might  have 
happened  if  the  gates  had  been  closed  to  immi- 
gration early  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  the 
non-Anglo-Saxon  races  kept  out,  does  not  con- 
cern us  now  any  more;  history  deals  with  what 
is,  and  not  what  has  been  or  what  might  have 
been;    deals  witli  facts,  not  with  sentiments. 

The  English  language  has  conquered  and 
through  it  the  United  States  are  closely  related 
to  England  by  a  common  language,  common 
forms  of  expression  and  intercommunication, 
and  a  common  literature,  so  much  so  that  with 
many  writers  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  they 
are  British  or  American.  In  some  respects  it 
must,  therefore,  be  regretted  that  the  complete 
racial  unity  of  the  two  English-speaking  nations 
has  not  been  preserved,  that  America  has  not 
remained  completely  of  Anglo-Saxon  race. 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  must  be  real- 
ized that  it  was  the  mixed  races  which  have 
done  the  world's  work,  which  have  led  in  all 
human  advance,  and  it  was  the  vitality  given 
by  the  mixture  of  races  which  has  created  all 

great  nations.     Thus  England  as  a  nation  was 

lyo 


THE   AMERICAN   NATION 

formed  by  the  mix  Lure  oi"  the  Norman  and  the 
Anglo-Saxon;  France  by  the  Celt,  Roman,  and 
Frank;  far  back  before  history,  tradition  tells 
of  the  creation  of  the  Roman  nation  bj^  the  tri- 
union  of  tribes — even  the  name  "tribe"  con- 
tains the  root  "three,"  in  memory  of  this 
formation  of  the  Roman  nation  from  three 
branches. 

Thus  there  is  no  doubt  that  had  it  not  been 
for  the  mixture  of  the  various  leading  races  of 
the  world  America  would  not  be  what  it  is 
to-day.  We  can  easily  realize  this  by  review- 
ing the  racial  characteristics-  of  the  foremost 
races  which  contributed  to  the  American  union. 

The  characteristic  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  is  his 
great  initiative.  He  is  the  empire-builder.  We 
only  need  to  think  of  names  like  Hastings, 
Washington,  Nelson,  Gordon,  Rhodes,  Kitch- 
ener, etc.  To  him  thus  is  due  the  push  and  the 
energy  which  have  opened  up  and  conquered  the 
New  World.  We  see  it  in  the  rapid  growth  of 
the  English  colonies,  compared  with  the  slow 
growth  of  other  nations'  colonies.  But  charac- 
teristic of  the  Anglo-Saxon  also  is  the  excessive; 
individualism  which  handicaps  him  in  co- 
operation, and  co-operation  more  and  more 
becomes  the  essential  of  progress.     Thus  the 


13 


191 


AMERICA  AND   THE   NEW   EPOCH 

Anglo-Saxons  are  not  prominent  as  organizers, 
but  rather  are  likely  to  be  muddlers;  the  pres- 
ent world's  war  affords  an  excellent  illustration 
hereof.  Thus  the  Anglo-Saxon  creates  and 
originates,  but  does  not  organize  what  he  cre- 
ated. 

The  Teuton  does  not  have  the  same  initiative 
as  the  Anglo-Saxon;  he  also  is  an  individualist 
— especially  those  of  the  Teuton  races  who 
emigrated  here,  because  their  individualistic 
ideas  did  not  conform  to  the  governments  under 
which  they  had  lived  in  Europe — but  the  in- 
dividualistic nature  of  the  Teuton  is  tempered 
and  controlled  to  a  considerable  extent  by  a 
collective  or  co-operative  temperament.  As 
the  result,  the  Teutons,  by  their  racial  charac- 
teristics, are  the  great  organizers.  We  only 
need,  in  the  history  of  our  nation,  think  of  a 
few  names  as  Astor,  Goethals,  Guggenheim, 
Harriman,  Roosevelt,  Schijff,  Schuster,  Schwab, 
Strauss,  Vanderbilt,  Vanderlip,  Warburg,  Wey- 
erhausser,  Rockefeller,  Wanamaker,  etc. 

Characteristic  of  the  Celtic  race  is  the  strong 
collectivistic  temperament,  associated  with  an 
individualistic  nature,  which  specially  fits  them 
as  administrators.  It  is  the  Celt  who  is  most 
proficient  to  rule  as  boss  by  the  consent  of  the 


THE  AMERICAN  NATION 

governed,  not  as  disciplinarian  by  orders  which 
his  subordinates  have  to  obey,  but  by  giving 
the  conception  of  primus  inter  pares.  Thus  he 
has  been  most  successful  in  politics,  while  the 
individualistic  Anglo-Saxon  necessarily  is  much 
less  successful  in  this  activity.  It  is  charac- 
teristic that  America's  largest  city  has  been 
ruled  almost  uninterruptedly  by  the  Celtic  race, 
and  that,  in  the  rare  instances  where  a  "reform 
government"  succeeded  to  carry  New  York,  it 
was  such  a  failure  that  it  always  was  wiped  out 
at  the  next  election.  Also,  look  around  es- 
pecially among  those  corporations  which  by 
their  close  relationship  with  large  numbers  of 
the  public  require  a  specially  high  grade  of 
social  sense  in  their  management — public  utility 
corporations — and  you  find  an  abnormally  large 
number  of  Irish  names  among  their  leaders. 

And  how  about  the  contribution  to  America 
by  the  other  races,  outside  of  these  three  leading 
civilized  races  of  to-day?  Do  not  let  us  forget 
that  the  greatest  of  all  Americans  was  neither 
Anglo-Saxon  nor  Teuton;  nay,  was  not  even 
Aryan,  but  was  of  the  Turanian  race — Abe 
Lincoln. 

The  three  great  races  which  contributed  to 

the  American  citizenshiji  of  to-day  are  supple- 

19;} 


AMERICA  AND  THE   NEW  EPOCH 

mentary,  commensal — originator,  organizer,  ad- 
ministrator— jointly  they  have  made  our  com- 
monwealth, and  any  split  between  them  means 
disaster.  The  Anglo-Saxon  alone,  without  the 
co-operation  of  the  Celt  and  German,  may 
originate,  but  probably  would  not  accomplish 
much  more  than  a  chaotic  muddle — somewhat 
of  this  we  have  seen  in  the  last  year  in  our 
country.  On  the  other  hand,  with  the  Teuton 
and  Celt  alone,  without  the  Anglo-Saxon, 
progress  would  slow  down  for  lack  of  initiative. 

There  really  never  was  a  serious  racial  an- 
tagonism in  our  country.  It  is  true,  during  the 
century  of  immigration  the  "native"  has  looked 
down  on  the  "Dutchy,"  he  then  in  turn  on  the 
"Mike,"  and  again  on  the  "Dago,"  etc.,  but 
only  the  names  were  racial,  the  antagonism  was 
not  racial,  but  that  of  the  previous  immigrant 
toward  the  lower  standard  of  living  of  the  later 
comer,  who  threatened  the  higher  standard  of 
living  acquired  by  the  former,  and  as  quickly  as 
the  new  immigrant  acquired  the  American 
standard  of  living  and  thereby  ceased  to  be 
a  danger  in  lowering  the  standard,  the  antag- 
onism disappeared. 

Politically,  racial  hatred  has  found  an  expres- 
sion only  once  in  our  country,  in  the  notorious 

194 


THE  AMERICAN  NATION 

Know-Nothing  party  of  a  past  generation;  but, 
unfortunately,  there  is  at  present  some  danger 
of  a  revival  of  racial  antagonism,  and  this  would 
be  a  national  calamity,  as  our  nation  needs  the 
friendly  co-operation  of  all  the  races  which  have 
contributed  to  the  coming  American  race. 

All  the  nations  which  are  involved  in  the  pres- 
ent world's  war  have  contributed  to  the  immi- 
gration which  has  formed  the  American  citi- 
zenship of  to-day,  and  it  is  natural  to  expect, 
however  much  the  immigrants  and  their  de- 
scendants have  become  true  Americans,  that 
they  should  have  some  sentimental  attachment 
or  sympathy  for  the  nation  of  their  forefathers. 
Indeed,  a  type  of  mind  which  in  one  or  two 
generations  can  lose  all  attachment  for  his  an- 
cestors' nation  is  not  the  type  of  mind  from 
which  to  build  a  strong  and  enduring  nation, 
is  not  the  type  of  mind  which  we  want  here 
m  America;  in  England,  after  [nearly  a  thou- 
sand years,  the  Norman  and  the  Anglo-Saxon 
type  are  still  distinguishable. 

Thus  it  is  natural  and  proper  that  American 
citizens  of  English  descent  should  largely  sym- 
pathize with  England,  American  citizens  of 
German  descent  with  Germany,  American  citi- 
zens of  Irish  descent  wish  England's  defeat,  etc. 

195 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

This  has  nothing  to  do  with  their  duty  as 
American  citizens,  with  their  allegiance  first, 
last,  and  always,  toward  America. 

Unfortunately,  an  American  expatriate  raised 
the  cry  of  "hyphenate,"  and  an  influential  press, 
misguided  by  business  interests,  took  it  up,  and 
finally  in  the  utterances  of  extremists — among 
them,  unfortunately,  some  politically  very 
prominent  men — it  reached  the  ultra  Know- 
Nothing  attitude  that  "only  a  citizen  of  British 
descent  can  be  a  real  true  American,  and  any- 
body not  of  Anglo-Saxon  descent  cannot  have 
the  type  of  mind  which  is  required  for  an 
American  citizen." 

With  this  it  became  a  national  menace,  for  it 
challenged  the  right  to  citizenship  of  the  ma- 
jority of  our  nation,  as  the  majority  is  not 
Anglo-Saxon  any  more.  Naturally,  all  political 
differences,  all  issues  between  the  various  politi- 
cal parties,  became  secondary  in  importance  be- 
fore the  defense  of  the  right  to  citizenship  of  the 
majorit^^  of  our  present  citizens.  As  seen,  it  is 
a  very  dangerous  and  very  unfortunate  political 
issue,  which  has  been  raised  thus  inadvertently 
by  [)oliticians  playing  to  temporary  excitement 
of  racial  prejudice. 

Such   vicious   attempts   of   making   political 

19G 


THE  AMERICAN  NATION 

capital  by  creating  racial  hatred  within  our 
nation  should  promptly  be  squashed  by  all  fair- 
minded  citizens.  It  is  obvious  that  all  Ameri- 
cans— with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  the  red 
Indian — are  hyphenates;  that  there  are  un- 
undoubtedly  a  few — a  very  few — British-Amer- 
icans who  are  more  Englishmen  than  Americans, 
German-Americans  who  are  more  Germans  than 
Americans,  etc.,  but  that  the  overwhelming 
majority  of  all  the  British-Americans,  German- 
Americans,  Irish-Americans,  etc.,  are  Americans 
and  nothing  else. 

But  some  good  features  the  raising  of  this 
issue  has  produced :  it  has  shown  the  anachron- 
ism in  many  of  our  conceptions  and  forms  of 
speech.  We  have  been  talking  of  the  native- 
born  Americans  "assimilating"  the  immigrants. 
There  can  be  no  such  thing;  assimilation  im- 
plies two  parties  becoming  similar,  but  implies 
both  changing.  Thus  the  native  does  not  assim- 
ilate the  immigrant,  but  native  and  immigrant 
assimilate  with  each  other,  and  the  native  as 
well  as  the  immigrant  changes,  fortunately,  for 
it  would  be  a  sad  America  if  we  still  hanged 
witches  as  the  Puritan  "natives"  did,  if  we  still 
had  the  Blue  Laws  and  the  religious  intolerance 
of  the  old  New-Englanders.     Or  we  may  say, 

197 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

"America  assimilates  all  the  immigrants  coming 
to  its  shores  into  a  new,  American  nation." 
But  this  nation  is  not  like  the  Puritan,  or  the 
Dutchman  of  New  Amsterdam,  or  the  German 
of  '48,  but  has,  more  or  less,  the  characteristics 
of  all  of  these. 

Thus,  when  we  speak  of  America  as  the 
melting-pot  of  the  nations  we  must  realize  that 
in  melting  together  different  metals  the  alloy 
is  not  like  any  one  of  the  metals  put  into  the 
pot,  and  thus  we  must  not  expect  that  the  prod- 
uct coming  out  of  the  melting-pot  of  the  nations 
will  be  in  temperament  and  characteristic  like 
the  British-American,  will  have  the  British  view- 
point— or  that  of  any  other  constituent  nation — 
however  much  this  may  disappoint  us. 

Inversely,  however,  we  must  realize  that  the 
Anglo-Saxon  strain  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the 
composition  of  the  American  race;  that  his- 
torically, by  the  previous  preponderance  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon,  it  has  exerted  more  influence  on 
the  molding  of  the  new  nation  than  any  other 
race,  and  that,  therefore,  at  least  for  some  time 
to  come,  Anglo-Saxon  characteristics  should  be 
more  prominent  than  those  of  any  other  race; 
but  they  cannot  be  predominant.
