VIII 

AMERICA   IN  THE  PAST 

THE  history  of  American  colonization  can 
be  divided  into  three  periods,  of  which  the 
latter  two  largely  overlap;  the  period  of  ex- 
ploitation, the  period  of  the  classic  civilization 
of  the  South,  and  the  period  of  the  individual- 
istic civilization  of  the  North. 

For  centuries  after  the  discovery  of  America 
the  new  continent  was  a  field  of  forcible  exploit- 
ation, but  no  serious  attempts  at  settlement  and 
organization  of  new  communities  were  made. 

The  European  nations,  Spaniards,  Portu- 
guese, etc.,  attracted  by  the  treasures  of  gold 
and  silver,  came  to  plunder,  but  not  to  settle 
and  stay;  few  remained,  and  the  white  popu- 
lation thus  grew  very  slowly — and  even  then 
strongly  intermixed  with  the  native  Indian 
population. 

The  gold  and  silver  fleets  carried  the  loot  of 
the  new  continent,  gathered  by  murder  and 

103 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

rapine,  to  Europe,  to  the  disaster  of  the  exploit- 
ing nations.  Spain  and  Portugal,  becoming  par- 
asites by  the  spoils  of  America,  followed  the 
fate  of  the  Roman  Empire,  decayed  and  fell 
from  their  height.  When  the  plunder  ended 
these  nations  had  ceased  to  be  self-supporting; 
poverty  thus  overtook  them,  and  only  to-day, 
after  centuries,  are  they  beginning  to  recover. 

The  new  continent  was  despoiled,  no  construc- 
tive work  was  done,  no  new  nations  were  created, 
and  when  finally  the  period  of  exploitation  came 
to  an  end,  and  the  Spanish-American  countries 
rose  and  gained  their  liberty  in  the  beginning 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  was  to  exchange 
exploitation  for  anarchy;  there  was  nothing  on 
which  to  build  a  stable  self-governing  nation, 
and  revolution  followed  revolution,  until  finally 
a  few  fairly  stable  governments  emerged — Ar- 
gentine, Brazil,  Chile,  Mexico.  And  even  these 
governments  are  not  very  stJible;  impoverished 
by  their  forcible  exploitation  of  their  European 
masters  in  former  times,  they  largely  had  to 
depend  on  foreign  capital  for  their  development, 
and  what  this  means  we  see  in  the  Mexico  of 
to-day;  development  by  foreign  capital  means 
development  for  foreigners,  but  exploitation  of 

the  nation,  and  if  the  country  is  not  unusually 

104 


AMERICA  IN  THE  PAST 

rich,  its  population  unusually  capable — as  was 
the  case  in  the  United  States — or  other  for- 
tunate circumstances  intervene  and  change  the 
trend  of  development,  sooner  or  later  a  reaction 
sets  in,  a  revolution  against  foreign  exploitation, 
and  then  it  is  doubtful  whether  a  stable  govern- 
ment of  the  natives  for  their  own  interests  will 
ultimately  arise,  or  whether  anarchism  will  end 
the  nation  as  an  independent  unit,  as  seems  to 
be  now  the  fate  of  Mexico. 

Here  probably  the  European  war  may  be  a 
godsend,  may  be  the  saving  of  the  smaller  na- 
tions of  this  hemisphere;  the  vast  destruction 
of  European  capital  by  the  world's  war  forced 
the  extensive  withdrawal  of  foreign  capital  from 
the  South  American  nations.  The  jBrst  effect, 
naturally,  was  wide-spread  disaster;  industry, 
trade,  and  agriculture  suffered;  but  the  final 
outcome  may  well  be  a  gradual  rise  of  these 
nations  by  their  own  resources;  very  slowly  in- 
deed, compared  with  the  rapid  advance  possible 
by  foreign  capital,  but  what  is  accomplished  in 
this  manner  is  by  the  nation  and  for  the  benefit 
of  the  nation,  is  constructive  advance  and  not 
destructive  exploitation,  and  here  the  United 
States,  as  the  big  brother  of  these  nations,  who 
has  successfully  passed  the  same  trials,  from 

105 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

foreign  exploitation  to  industrial  independence, 
may  offer  material  help  and  assistance.  But 
this  will  require  a  great  deal  more  patience  and 
forbearance  than  we  have  usually  shown  in  our 
dealings  with  other  nations. 

In  the  United  States  the  immigration  from 
the  beginning  was  for  colonization.  No  wealth 
of  gold  or  silver  attracted  the  plunderers  of 
Europe,  and  the  northern  shores  of  the  Ameri- 
can continent  thus  were  neglected  long  after 
Central  and  South  America  had  been  over- 
run and  exploited.  But  when  finally  the  colo- 
nization of  the  United  States  began,  it  was  for 
settlement,  and  the  colonists,  driven  to  our 
shores  by  political  and  religious  persecution, 
and  later  by  Europe's  unfavorable  industrial 
and  social  conditions,  came  to  stay,  to  form  a 
new  nation. 

The  Southern  colonics  languished  for  a  long 
time,  the  climate  being  too  hot  for  white  farm 
lal^or.  It  was  the  introduction  of  the  negro 
slave  which  made  Southern  colonization  a  suc- 
cess and  created  tlie  historical  South,  an  agri- 
cultural community  raising  tobacco,  cotton, 
etc.,  on  large  plantations  operated  by  slave 
labor.  Thus  arose  a  civilization  based  on  slave 
labor;    a  small  master  class  in  control  of  all 

106 


AMERICA  IN  THE  PAST 

political,  industrial,  and  social  power,  free  to 
devote  their  time  to  administration,  literature, 
art,  and  science,  highly  civilized  and  superior 
intellectually  to  the  uncouth  farmers  and  sailors 
of  the  Northern  States,  thereby  for  generations 
in  control  of  the  political  government  of  the 
entire  nation.  Below  them  was  a  mass  of 
human  beasts  of  burden,  slave  laborers,  as  a 
rule  well  kept  and  taken  care  of,  just  as,  and 
for  the  same  reason  that,  we  take  care  of  our 
cattle  now,  and  therefore  as  a  rule  not  seriously 
dissatisfied  with  their  lot ;  and  a  number  of  poor 
white  peoi)le,  serving  the  masters  as  overseers, 
helpers,  etc.,  or  drifting  idly  as  "poor  white 
trash."  In  short,  it  was  a  civilization  identical 
in  almost  every  respect  with  the  classic  civiliza- 
tion of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome,  which  after 
twenty  centuries  reappeared  on  this  continent. 
Such  civilization  inherently  is  agricultural,  re- 
lying for  its  industrial  products  on  foreign  trade, 
and  free  trade  thus  was  the  necessary  require- 
ment of  it. 

Entirely  different  was  the  colonization  of  the 
Northern  States,  Small  individual  farmers  and 
traders  settled  in  New  York,  Pennsylvania, 
New  England.  The  climatic  and  agricultural 
conditions  were  unsuitable  for  negro  labor,  and 

107 


AMERICA  AND  THE   NEW  EPOCH 

slavery  thus  never  gained  a  foothold,  but  in- 
dividual freeholders  settled  and  lived  together 
in  small  communities,  eking  out  their  living 
from  the  rather  poor  soil  of  the  Northern  States, 
or  by  hunting  and  trading  with  the  Indians,  or 
sailing  the  oceans. 

It  is  in  these  communities  of  the  early  colo- 
nial days  in  the  Northern  States,  that  our  pres- 
ent American  Government  originated  with  its 
great  fundamental  democratic  principle  that 
*'all  men  are  born  free  and  equal"  and  "that 
"government  can  exist  only  with  the  consent  of 
the  governed."  But  here  also  the  foundation 
was  laid  of  the  terrible  defect  of  our  Govern- 
ment which  has  made  it  a  byword  of  inefficiency 
throughout  the  world — the  "rotation  in  office 
for  the  distribution  of  spoils." 

Historically,  the  nearest  analogy  to  this  early 
colonial  society  of  tlie  pioneer  days  probably 
is  found  in  the  organization  of  the  German 
tribes  in  the  prc-feudal  days,  in  the  later  days 
of  the  Roman  Empire;  an  aristocratic  democ- 
racy, small  communities  of  citizens,  equal  in 
rights  and  freedom,  similar  in  occupation, 
knowledge,  and  experience,  though  differing  in 
their  standing  in  the  community,  tlieir  influ- 
ence and  authority;  very  strongly  individualistic 

108 


AMERICA   IN  THE   PAST 

and  self-reliant;  trained  by  experience  and  ne- 
cessity to  take  care  of  themselves  in  fighting 
against  the  hardship  of  their  existence,  against 
the  barren  soil,  unfriendly  nature,  hostile  Indi- 
ans. Little  help  was  to  be  expected  from  a 
Government  which  was  practically  non-existing; 
locally  the  loosest  kind  of  government,  essen- 
tially a  voluntary  co-operation  with  little  man- 
datory power,  and  far  away  across  the  ocean  a 
central  government  in  the  English  king,  which 
essentially  limited  itself  to  foreign  relations, 
but  took  little  part  in  the  local  issues  of  the 
community,  and  where  the  British  colonial 
governor  attempted  to  govern  the  internal  af- 
fairs of  the  colony  it  usually  was  a  failure  and 
led  to  resentment  and  opi)osition,  and  finally  to 
the  Revolution.  Thus  the  relation  of  the  Amer- 
ican Colonics  to  the  Britisli  king  was  similar  to 
that  of  the  German  tribes  in  the  pre-feudal  days 
to  the  Augustus  in  Rome  as  their  far-distant 
overlord. 

In  the  small  agricultural  community  of  the 
Colonial  days,  consisting  of  citizens  of  similar 
occupation,  character,  and  intelligence,  any 
member  of  the  community  could  carry  out  the 
simple  functions  of  the  Government  about 
eciually  well,  but  the  office  was  a  duty  rather 

109 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

than  an  lionor,  and  however  little  time  it  de- 
manded, it  would  have  been  unfair  to  ask  the 
same  citizen  to  carry  it  for  many  years. 

Thus  in  those  days  and  under  this  simple 
form  of  social  structure  it  was  natural  that  any 
intelligent  citizen  was  considered  eligible  to  any 
oflBce,  but  that  the  oflSce-holder  changed  at 
every  term. 

Thus  became  ingrained  in  the  American  na- 
tional character  the  conception  that  any  intelli- 
gent citizen  can  fill  any  ojQSce,  and  that  it  is 
desirable  to  change  the  office-holder  at  every 
election. 

While  this  was  feasible  and  worked  satis- 
factorily in  the  simple  colonial  society,  it  has 
become  a  serious  handicap  in  our  present  highly 
complex  civilization.  When  in  rapid  succession 
a  theater-director,  a  physician,  a  minister,  a 
lawyer  are  placed  in  administrative  charge  of  a 
municipality — all  good  men  and  true,  but  none 
of  them  by  i)rofessional  experience  qualified  to 
the  administration  of  the  municipal  corporation 
of  to-day — or  where  a  barber  is  placed  in  charge 
of  the  city  water- works,  a  saloon-keeper  in  the 
administration  of  tlie  public  works,  no  matter 
how  cai)al)le,  honest,  and  intelh'gent  the  men 
may  be,  the  failure  of  any  professional  qualifi- 

110 


AMERICA  IN  THE  FAST 

cation,  the  absence  of  the  knowledge  and  experi- 
ence required  for  the  efficient  administration  of 
the  office  necessarily  must  lead  to  the  incom- 
peLency  and  inefficiency  which  we  see  displayed 
throughout  all  our  political  life;  and  when,  then, 
the  incumbent  in  the  office  is  changed  by  the 
election  or  appointment  of  his  equally  incom- 
petent successor,  just  when  he  begins  to  under- 
stand a  little  of  the  duties  of  his  office,  the  neces- 
sary result  is  the  failure  of  political  government, 
which  is  the  characteristic  of  our  nation. 

This  is  the  bad  inheritance  from  our  early 
Colonial  days,  which  we  shall  have  to  over- 
come to  reap  the  full  benefit  of  the  great  prin- 
ciples created  then  and  later  laid  down  in  the 
Declaration  of  Independence  and  in  the  Con- 
stitution. 

Politically,  the  first  period  in  the  history  of 
our  country  represents  its  consolidation  as  an 
English-speaking  nation:  the  Dutch,  French, 
Spanish,  etc.,  colonies  were  absorbed  or  forced 
into  a  position  where  they  coidd  no  longer 
threaten  the  supremacy  of  the  English  colonies, 
and  wars  between  European  nations  could  no 
longer  be  waged  on  American  battle-fields. 
Hereby  the  American  colonies  were  withdrawn 
from   all    direct   interest   in   the   controversies 

8  111 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

fought  out  between  European  nations,  and  their 
relations  with  the  "Mother  Country,"  England, 
thus  became  the  predominant  issue.  No  longer 
disturbed  by  the  reflection  of  European  wars,  the 
colonies  grew  in  strength  and  self-confidence, 
and  when  England  failed  to  recognize  their 
claims  to  control  their  own  destiny,  the  Revolu- 
tion was  the  result. 

It  left  the  colonies  independent,  but  as  thir- 
teen separate  nations,  and  the  issue  then  was 
whether  and  how  far  they  should  co-operate. 
They  might  have  remained  independent  and 
separate,  other  nations  formed  on  the  continent, 
and  what  is  now  the  United  States  would  have 
become  a  number  of  separate  and  independent 
nations,  just  as  South  America  is  to-day,  with 
constant  rivalries  and  contentions.  Fortunately 
we  escaped  this;  the  Union  was  formed  by  vol- 
untary co-operation  of  the  thirteen  States,  and 
ever  since  the  progress  toward  closer  co-opera- 
tion and  centralization  of  the  nation  has  gone 
on  steadily. 

However,  as  the  States  had  voluntarily  en- 
tered the  Union,  so,  naturally,  it  might  be  held 
that  they  could  withdraw  again  from  the  Union 
whenever  they  desired.  Thus  when  in  1812, 
during    the    unsuccessful    war    with    England, 


AMERICA   IN  THE   PAST 

delegates  of  the  New  England  States  met  at 
Hartford  and  seriously  discussed  the  advis- 
ability of  again  becoming  British  colonies,  the 
withdrawal  from  the  Union  did  not  appear  such 
treason  as  it  seems  to  us  now.  Even  when,  in 
ISGO,  the  South  lost  control  of  the  national 
Government  and  the  Southern  States  withdrew 
from  the  Union  and  formed  the  Confederation, 
many  people  considered  that  they  had  the  right 
to  do  so  and  recommended  to  let  them  go. 
Fortunately,  better  counsel  prevailed.  Other- 
wise we  would  have  two  nations,  and  in  the 
agricultural  depression  of  1893  the  North  would 
probably  have  split  again  into  an  industrial 
East  and  an  agricultural  West,  and  with  three 
nations  with  different  and  antagonistic  interests 
dividing  the  continent,  America  woidd  have 
been  led  into  the  same  path  which  Europe  fol- 
lowed, with  the  same  result. 

Thus  it  was  Lincoln's  administration  which 
established  forever  the  principle,  "The  Union, 
One  and  Indivisible."  It  was  this  issue  which 
was  fought  out  in  the  Civil  War,  and  the  Civil 
War  thus  created  the  American  Nation,  not  the 
Revolutionary  War;  the  latter  made  the  States 
independent  of  England,  and  thus  separated 
the  development  of  America  from  that  of  Eu- 

113 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

rope,  but  it  did  not  yet  permanently  settle  the 
character  of  the  American  development,  whether 
it  should  be  that  of  a  stable,  peaceful  nation,  or 
an  equilibrium  of  nations  balancing  on  the 
sword's  point,  like  Europe. 
^  The  development  of  the  South  as  a  stable, 
civilized  community  antedates  that  of  the 
North,  and  during  the  period  from  the  Revo- 
lutionary War  to  the  Civil  War,  the  South 
governed  the  Union.  However,  the  classic  or- 
ganization of  the  South  was  that  of  a  low  pop- 
ulation density,  while  the  individualistic  soci- 
ety of  the  North  is  capable  of  far  greater  pop- 
ulation density,  with  its  numerous  small  farms 
operated  by  citizens  instead  of  the  few  large 
plantations  operated  by  slave  labor  found  in 
the  South. 

But  the  New  England  farms,  never  very  fer- 
tile, became  more  and  more  exhausted,  hunting 
ceased  with  the  disappearance  of  the  game,  the 
Indian  trade  vanished  with  the  Indian,  and 
when  the  population  penetrated  farther  into 
the  interior  of  the  country,  the  ocean-carrying 
trade  contributed  less  to  the  support  of  the 
nation.  Thus  industrial  development  appeared 
the  only  saving  of  the  steadily  increasing  popu- 
lation, and  the  numerous  small  water-powers 

lit 


AMERICA   IN  THE   PAST 

along  New  England's  mill-streams  invited.  But 
there  could  be  no  successful  development  of 
industries  in  competition  with  England's  es- 
tablished superior  industrial  power,  without 
protection  of  the  new  industries  by  tariff  laws. 

But  the  agricultural  South  required  free  trade 
for  the  exchange  of  its  crops  against  England's 
industrial  products. 

Thus  the  issues  were  joined  between  the 
free  trade  demanded  by  the  South  and  the  pro- 
tective tariff  required  to  raise  the  industries 
needed  for  the  support  of  the  North. 

The  South  controlled  the  Government,  but 
the  North  was  growing  more  rapidly  in  popu- 
lation, and  all  efforts  of  the  Southern  states- 
men politically  in  charge  of  the  nation  could 
not  forever  postpone  the  day  when  the  North 
got  control  of  the  Government,  with  Lincoln's 
election. 

The  emancipation  of  the  slaves  broke  the 
power  of  the  South  by  destroying  its  labor,  and 
the  South  was  ruined,  the  classic  period  of  our 
civilization  ended,  and  the  individualistic  era  of 
industrial  capitalism  ruled  supreme  on  this 
continent. 

For  many  years  the  South  was  conquered 
territory,   received   the   treatment   which   now 

115 


AMElllCA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

the  conquered  nations— Belgium,  Servia,  Egypt 
— receive,  while  the  North,  protected  against 
England's  competition,  and  with  the  vast  ter- 
ritories of  the  West  and  the  South  as  assured 
markets,  rapidly  developed  its  industries. 

For  a  generation  the  South  was  suffering  in 
poverty,  then,  in  the  90's,  came  the  beginning 
of  the  new  South  and  the  decadence  of  the  New 
England  States. 

The  industries  had  advanced  to  such  manu- 
facturing units  that  the  small  mill-streams  of 
New  England  did  not  satisfy  the  power  require- 
ments any  more,  while  the  numerous  large 
rivers  of  the  South  offered  abundant  power. 
Electrical  engineering  had  advanced  far  enough 
to  make  the  place  of  the  power  consumption 
independent  of  the  source  of  power,  by  long- 
distance transmission,  and  the  same  economic 
laws  which  had  taken  the  cotton  industry  from 
England  and  transferred  it  to  New  England,  as 
nearer  to  the  source  of  supply  of  raw  materials 
and  of  denuind  for  the  finished  products,  these 
same  laws  now  began  to  withdraw  the  cotton 
industries  from  New  England  and  locate  it  in 
the  Southern  States  witliin  the  cotton-fields, 
and  the  New  England  mills  began  to  languish, 
the  Southern  colLou-mills  increased  and  nudti- 

IIG 


AMERICA   IN  THE   PAST 

plied.  In  1894  tlie  first  electrically  driven 
cotton-mill  in  the  South  started  at  Columbia, 
N.  C,  built  with  Northern  capital.  The  next 
year  the  Peltzer  Mill,  owned  by  Southern  capi- 
tal, started  electrical  operation,  and  since  that 
time  the  South  has  rapidly  become  an  indus- 
trial country,  like  the  North  a  generation  ago; 
cheaper  power,  better  and  cheaper  raw  mate- 
rials, cheaper  living  conditions  in  the  Southern 
climate,  gave  all  the  advantage  to  the  South, 
while  New  England  had  to  find  its  saving  by 
the  increasing  emigration  of  its  population  to 
the  middle  West  and  the  far  West  of  our 
country,  and  New  England's  farms  are  standing 
abandoned. 

The  antagonism  of  interests  between  the 
South  and  the  North,  which  caused  the  Civil 
War,  thus  has  vanished  before  the  industrial 
development  of  tlie  South,  made  possible  by 
electrical  power,  and  the  only  differences  still 
remaining  are  those  due  to  the  later  industrial 
development  of  the  South,  which  thus  far  has 
failed  to  protect  its  labor  supply  by  adequate 
educational  laws,  and  laws  against  the  exploita- 
tion of  child  labor  and  women  labor.  These  are 
now  the  issues,  and  .ire  the  black  marks  against 

the  present   South — illiteracy,   exploitation   of 

117 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

children  and  of  women.  Just  as  the  industries 
of  the  North  prosper  in  spite  of  the  withdrawal 
of  the  children  for  education,  and  the  limitation 
of  their  exploitation,  under  the  still  more  favor- 
able conditions  of  the  South  the  same  will  be 
the  case.
