ENGLAND   IN   THE   INDIVIDUALISTIC   ERA 

WHILE  France  in  the  great  revolution  gave 
the  world  the  industrial  era,  England 
very  soon  took  the  leadership,  and  has  retained 
it  ever  since.  Various  causes  contributed:  the 
early  start  of  England  in  gradual  revolution 
from  the  industrial  centers  of  the  later  Middle 
Ages,  which  had  been  destroyed  on  the  Conti- 
nent by  the  perpetual  wars  of  the  absolute  mon- 
archies, but  survived  in  England;  the  protec- 
tion of  its  island  position  by  the  ocean,  which 
kept  hostile  armies  out  of  England  during  the 
Napoleonic  wars;  the  acquisition  of  a  great 
colonial  empire :  whenever  Napoleon  conquered 
and  annexed  another  country,  England  took  its 
colonies,  and  when  France,  after  its  final  defeat 
by  the  allies,  had  to  give  back  all  these  nations, 
England,  as  one  of  the  allied  "liberators,"  kept 
most  of  their  colonies,  and  so  India,  South 
Africa,  etc.,  became  English.     The  wealth  of 

5  63 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

England  in  coal  and  iron,  the  fundamental 
requisites  of  industrialism,  gave  her  a  great 
advantage.  But  most  instrumental  of  all,  and 
more  dominant  than  the  other  incidental  ad- 
vantages, was  the  strongly  individualistic  char- 
acter of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  which  gave  it  the 
leadership  in  the  individualistic  era,  and  supplied 
the  initiative  to  create  industrial  capitalism. 

England  thus  became  the  great  industrial 
country,  producing  and  supplying  the  world 
with  steel  and  iron,  textiles,  machinery,  and  all 
manufactured  goods,  England  became  the  uni- 
versal world's  supply  of  manufactured  goods, 
from  the  fetishes  and  idols  of  the  heathen  to 
the  Bibles  and  missionaries  to  convert  them. 
Free  trade,  early  established  in  England,  and 
consistently  maintained,  gave  a  cheap  supply  of 
food  and  raw  materials.  An  effective  i)ropa- 
ganda  spread  free  trade  to  the  other  nations, 
unrestrictedly  opened  their  markets  to  English 
products,  and  for  generations  retarded  the  de- 
velopment of  industries  in  other  nations,  and 
kept  them  industrial  dependencies — like  our 
nation  before  the  Civil  War.  England  was  a 
prosperous  industrial  nation  under  free  trade, 
and  so  the  other  nations  were  led  to  believe  if 
they  only  embraced  free  trade  they  would  be- 

G4 


ENGLAND  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

come  equally  industrial  and  prosperous.  It 
took  generations  to  realize  that  for  England  as 
a  dominating  industrial  nation,  having  no  in- 
dustrial competitor,  free  trade  was  an  advan- 
tage, but  no  industrial  development  could  hope 
for  success  in  another  nation  in  competition 
with  the  powerful,  highly  developed  industries 
of  England,  having  open  access  to  the  markets. 
We  may  listen  with  rather  mixed  feelings  to  the 
complaints  of  our  protectionists,  asking  for 
"protection"  of  our  "infant  industries,"  when 
we  hear  that  these  infant  industries  hold  first  or 
second  rank  in  the  world's  production,  and  often 
sell  their  products  in  the  foreign  markets 
cheaper  than  in  our  own  country;  but  in  the 
agricultural  America  before  the  Civil  War,  in 
the  agricultural  Germany  of  fifty  years  ago, 
any  new  industry  was  certain  to  be  crushed 
quickly  and  promptly  and  destroyed  by  Eng- 
land's dumping  competitive  products  regardless 
of  price — and  then  recuperating  by  higher 
prices  when  the  new  industry  had  been  de- 
stroyed. There  was  nothing  immoral  or  im- 
proper in  this;  it  is  done  to-day  by  every  in- 
dustrial nation,  as  it  is  the  law  and  code  of  the 
competitive  age — the  stronger  destroys  or 
absorbs  the  weaker. 

65 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

But  finally  the  other  nations — ^America  after 
the  Civil  War,  then  Germany  and  the  others — 
closed  their  gates,  developed  their  own  indus- 
tries, became  industrially  independent  of  Eng- 
land, and  finally  became  her  competitors  on 
the  markets  of  the  world. 

For  over  half  a  century,  however,  England 
Leld  the  markets  of  the  world  without  any 
competition.  Then  and  thus,  from  the  vast 
profits  of  this  time,  was  the  foundation  laid  of 
the  vast  financial  power  of  England,  which  still 
to-day  holds  the  world  in  bondage. 

With  the  development  of  America  and  Ger- 
many as  industrial  nations  began  the  decadence 
of  England's  industries.  Developed  at  an  earlier 
time  and  under  conditions  when  there  was  no 
serious  competition,  England's  industrial  sys- 
tem did  not  show  the  productive  efficiency  of 
its  later  competitors.  America  and  Germany 
both  organized  their  industries  on  a  larger  scale 
with  more  modern  conceptions,  and  especially 
they  utilized  to  the  fullest  extent  all  the  intel- 
lectual abilities  of  the  nation,  while  England 
failed  in  this  respect. 

England's  industrial  preponderance  had  been 
built  up  from  the  factory  and  the  machine-shop, 
by  men  working  up  from  the  ranks,  but  the 

G6 


ENGLAND  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

country's  higher  educational  institutions  had 
little  part  in  the  industrial  development.  Thus 
deprived  of  many  of  the  country's  best  intelli- 
gences, unable  to  secure  the  higher  industrial 
efficiency  which  comes  from  the  broad  and 
systematic  training  of  the  industrial  leaders  in 
technical  educational  institutions,  England's 
industries  found  themselves  at  an  increasingly 
serious  disadvantage  against  their  later  com- 
petitors, and  when,  in  the  last  decades,  the 
seriousness  of  the  situation  was  beginning  to  be 
realized,  remedial  action  was  difficult,  because 
the  educational  institutions,  not  receiving  the 
assistance  and  co-operation  of  the  industries, 
had  in  their  technological  branches  remained 
behind  the  engineering  schools  of  America  and 
Germany. 

In  these  latter  countries,  in  the  beginning  of 
the  industrial  awakening  a  close  co-operation 
and  practically  an  alliance  had  been  established 
between  the  industry  and  the  technical  college 
or  university.  The  industry  gave  preference  to 
the  college-trained  men — the  reverse  of  what 
was  the  rule  in  England — often,  as  in  the  elec- 
trical industry,  even  made  college  training  prac- 
tically mandatory  for  all  higher  positions,  and 
the  leaders  of  the  industry  devoted  consider- 

67 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

able  time  and  attention,  and  even  gave  material 
financial  assistance,  to  the  engineering  schools, 
opened  their  establishments  to  instructors  and 
students  of  these  schools,  advised  and  guided 
their  courses,  and  so  did  everything  to  make  the 
engineering  schools  most  useful  for  the  indus- 
tries, while  the  faculties  of  the  technical  schools 
quickly  realized  the  advantage  of  this  close  co- 
operation with  the  industry,  encouraged  it  to 
the  fullest  extent,  wherever  possible  selected 
their  instructors  from  the  industries,  in  short, 
availed  themselves  of  the  assistance  given  by 
the  industries. 

As  the  result,  with  the  exception  of  those 
industries  such  as  ship-building,  on  which  her 
existence  depended,  England,  once  the  only  in- 
dustrial nation,  dropped  behind  America  and" 
Germany,  especially  so  in  the'^nore  recent 
industries.  Thus  in  electrical  engineering,  in 
the  last  years  before  the  war,  when  there  was 
any  great  electrical  engineering  work  done  in 
England  or  her  colonies,  it  was  usually  "made 
in  America"  or  "made  in  Germany." 

Contributory  to  the  industrial  decadence  was 
England's  labor  situation.  In  the  early  days  of 
the  period  the  standard  of  living  of  the  British 
industrial  worker  was  relatively  high,  especially 

C8 


ENGLAND  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

so  in  comparison  with  the  masses  in  the  other, 
industrially  undeveloped  nations.  With  the  in- 
creasing power  of  industrial  capitalism  the 
standard  of  the  industrial  worker  was  gradually 
but  steadily  lowered,  and  with  it  his  industrial 
efficiency.  First  this  was  little  noticed,  es- 
pecially as  there  was  no  comparison  yet  with 
the  conditions  in  other  nations,  in  which  indus- 
trialism was  just  beginning,  and  even  after  the 
lowering  of  the  standard  of  living  became 
marked,  for  generations  conservatism  and  the 
strong  individualistic  tendency  of  the  English- 
men prevented  effective  organization  to  combat 
the  lowering  of  the  standard.  It  was  significant 
that  during  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  at  the  numerous  international  con- 
gresses of  the  labor  interests  the  British  trade- 
unionists  either  held  ostentatiously  aloof,  or 
opposed  any  joint  national  or  political  action. 
When  finally,  in  the  last  years,  the  mass  or- 
ganization of  the  British  labor  elements  came 
industrially  and  politically,  it  came  with  a 
rush,  and  while  accomplishing  material  results 
in  arresting  the  downward  trend  of  the  stand- 
ard of  living,  it  had  the  defects  of  any  very 
rapid  growth:  the  absence  of  the  stability  and 
steadiness  of  development,  which  can  be  given 

C9 


AlVIERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

only  by  gradual  evolution,  but  not  by  revo- 
lutionary change;  the  preponderance  of  de- 
structive over  constructive  tendencies;  the  un- 
necessarily great  harm  to  the  industries  by  the 
cataclysmic  activities,  etc. 

By  this  time,  the  first  period,  that  of  England 
as  industrial  power,  had  passed;  other  nations 
had  forged  ahead  industrially,  and  England  had 
entered  the  second  period  of  her  capitalistic 
age,  that  of  England  as  financial  power. 

It  is  significant  to  realize  that  industrial  con- 
vulsions, such  as  strikes  of  half  a  million  or  a 
million  railway  workers,  miners,  etc.,  which 
would  have  paralyzed  and  plunged  into  indus- 
trial panic  any  other  nation,  passed  over  Eng- 
land without  any  appreciable  effect  on  her 
prosperity. 

What  mattered  it  to  England  that  she  lost 
the  American  market  and  American  industries 
grew  and  supplied  the  home  market  and  en- 
tered the  world's  market,  even  into  England, 
as  long  as  the  American  industries  were  financed 
by  British  capital  and  the  profits  of  the  Ameri- 
can industries  went  to  England,  hundreds  of 
millions  per  year,  as  dividends  and  interest  on 
British  investment  in  American  industries? 
What  mattered  it,  when  British  industries  de- 

70 


ENGLAND  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

clined,  as  long  as  all  over  the  world,  from  Mexico 
to  Ceylon,  and  from  China  to  South  Africa,  agri- 
culture and  industry,  financed  by  British  capi- 
tal, sent  their  profits  to  England,  and  the  entire 
world  thus  paid  tribute?  Not  political  tribute 
as  conquered  nations,  as  of  old,  but  tribute  just 
the  same — industrial  tribute — the  return  on 
British  capital  invested  all  over  the  world;  the 
capital  which  had  been  created  by  the  profits  of 
the  British  industries  during  the  time  when 
England  was  the  leading  industrial  nation,  and 
had  accumulated  ever  since. 

Thus  England  became  more  or  less  inde- 
pendent of  its  home  production,  became  the 
great  financial  power  of  the  world,  London  the 
world's  financial  center  which  controlled  the 
industries  of  the  nations,  and  so  England  be- 
came able  to  a  large  extent  to  live  on  the  re- 
turns of  her  capital  invested  throughout  the 
world. 

This  is  for  England  the  most  serious  side  of 
the  present  war.  It  is  British  capital  which 
must  bear  the  enormous,  almost  inconceivable 
financial  burden  of  the  war,  and  however  vast 
British  capital  is,  it  is  gradually  being  impaired 
by  the  steady  drain,  and  with  every  month 
that  the  war  continues,  the  reorganization  of 

71 


AMERICA  AND  THE   NEW  EPOCH 

England's  economic  system  after  the  war  be- 
comes more  certain,  the  necessity  of  recon- 
structing its  domestic  economy  so  as  to  carry 
a  much  larger  part  of  its  consumption  by  na- 
tional production,  less  by  industrial  exploitation 
of  other  nations  or  colonies — that  is,  to  live 
more  fully  on  its  productive  income,  less  on  the 
interest  of  its  capital. 

While  this  readjustment  and  retrenchment 
necessarily  must  lead  to  wide-spread  hardship, 
it  is  undoubtedly  the  best  that  could  have 
happened  to  England  as  a  living  nation.  No 
nation  has  yet  lived  as  parasite  on  the  work  of 
other  nations,  and  remained  alive;  so  the 
Roman  Empire  has  gone  to  decay;  so  Spain, 
when  after  the  discovery  of  America  the  riches 
of  the  new  continent  came  to  her  in  the  silver- 
fleets,  has  fallen  from  her  height  and  not  re- 
covered yet,  after  centuries. 

But  for  all  the  other  nations  of  the  world — 
those  which  were  "developed"  by  British  cap- 
ital— it  will  mean  reorganization  and  recon- 
struction, also;  an  industrial  depression  first, 
by  the  withdrawal  of  the  British  money,  which 
had  "made  the  wheels  go,"  and  then  a  gradual 
recovery  under  a  more  complete  national 
industrial  independence. 

li 


ENGLAND  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

In  our  country  the  conditions  have  been 
somewhat  different,  in  so  far  as  we  have  largely 
escaped  the  industrial  depression,  and  our  in- 
dustrial recovery  under  national,  American  cap- 
ital has  been  very  rapid.  Before  1893,  America 
was  practically  a  financial  dependency  of  Eng- 
land. After  the  panic  of  1893,  America's  finan- 
cial strength  gradually  rose,  and  during  the 
two  years  of  the  present  war  we  have  made  an 
enormously  rapid  progress  toward  financial 
independence,  largely  because  a  considerable 
part  of  the  British  capital,  which  had  to  be 
withdrawn  from  the  markets  of  the  world  to 
finance  the  war,  found  its  way  to  America  to 
pay  for  supplies,  food,  and  industrial  products. 

However,  we  must  not  overestimate  our 
position.  We  are  still  very  far  from  financial 
independence,  and  the  hope  to  see  the  world's 
financial  center  shift  from  London  to  New 
York  is  still  very  much  of  a  dream — far  from 
realization.  Not  a  dream,  however,  but  quite 
within  reach  is  the  opportunity  to  replace  Eu- 
ropean capital  by  American  capital  in  the  indus- 
trial development  of  those  countries  which  are 
within  our  sphere  of  influence — South  America, 
Central  America,  and  Mexico.
