XI 

DEMOCRACY   AND   MONARCHY 

As  seen  in  the  preceding  chapters,  a  reorgan- 
jLa.  ization  of  our  nation's  industrial-political 
system  is  inevitable,  if  we  hope  to  retain  and 
extend  our  industrial  prosperity  against  the 
highly  organized  and  efficient  co-operative  sys- 
tems of  industrial  society  into  which  the  Euro- 
pean war  is  forcing  the  nations.  We  will  have 
to  stop  our  muddling,  our  interference  of  every- 
body with  everybody,  and  prepare  to  meet 
Europe  by  a  still  more  efficient  co-operative 
industrial  system. 

How  can  we  organize  such  efficiency  of  in- 
dustrial co-operation?  What  forms  or  shapes 
must  such  organization  assume  in  our  nation? 
It  is  a  matter  of  evolution,  of  which  we  cannot 
foresee  the  end,  but  one  thing  we  can  see  with 
certainty,  and  that  is,  how  not  to  proceed;  we 
cannot  copy  European  organizations  and  hope 
to  be  successful.    It  would,  indeed,  be  an  easy 

142 


DEMOCRACY  AND   MONARCHY 

task  if  we  could.  We  all  realize  that  Germany 
had  reached  the  highest  industrial  efficiency 
before  the  war,  and  thus  it  would  appear  nat- 
ural to  copy  the  German  methods,  the  German 
organization,  and  thereby  expect  to  get  the 
same  efficiency.  But  the  industrial  organiza- 
tion which  has  been  so  successful  in  Germany, 
if  attempted  in  our  country,  would,  in  all  prob- 
ability, be  a  disastrous  failure.  We  may  just 
as  well  realize  this,  as  there  is  a  strong  sentiment 
in  our  country  to  copy  European  ways,  es- 
pecially now,  when  the  need  of  preparedness  to 
meet  the  European  nations  after  the  war  has 
been  so  forcibly  impressed  upon  us,  that  many 
of  us  have  lost  all  perspective  and  hysterically 
call  for  doing  something  or  anything,  however 
foolish  it  might  appear  on  calmer  consideration. 
Methods  of  organization  and  industrial  prog- 
ress which  have  been  successful  in  Europe  can- 
not be  successful  in  our  country,  nor  can 
American  ways  be  transplanted  to  Europe  and 
there  give  the  same  results  as  here,  because  our 
national  temperament  is  entirely  different,  is, 
indeed,  the  opposite  of  that  of  all  European  na- 
tions. x\merica's  national  character  is  democrat- 
ic, while  that  of  all  the  European  nations,  from 
republican  France  to  constitutional  Germany 

lo  143 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

and  autocratic  Russia  or  theocratic  Turkey,  is 
monarchical,  and  between  these  two  national 
temperaments  there  is  an  unbridgeable  gulf. 

The  fundamental  difference  between  the  two 
national  temperaments  is  best  illustrated  by  con- 
sidering the  different  ways  by  which  a  change, 
such  as  an  industrial  progress,  is  brought  about. 

In  the  monarchical  nation  the  problem  such 
as  the  necessity  of  vocational  education,  or  of 
labor  legislation,  old-age  insurance,  etc.,  is  dis- 
cussed by  individuals,  societies;  political  parties 
write  it  in  their  platforms,  etc. ;  but  all  this  re- 
mains a  mere  academic  discussion  without  re- 
sults, until  the  central  Government  is  converted 
to  the  new  idea.  Then  the  new  idea  is  intro- 
duced by  governmental  order;  the  central  Gov- 
ernment makes  the  plans  and  establishes  the 
organization;  a  federal  bureau,  with  sub- 
organizations  in  the  states  or  provinces;  below 
them  others  in  the  municipalities,  etc.  A  part 
of  the  new  organization  is  first  introduced,  as 
much  as  the  federal  Government  considers  ad- 
visable, then  more  and  more,  and  so  from  the 
central  Government  the  organization  is  ex- 
tended toward  the  periphery,  to  the  individual. 
Thus  Germany's  social  and  industrial  progress 
was  accomplished;    until   the  federal  Govern- 

144 


DEMOCRACY  AND  MONARCHY 

ment  was  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  social 
legislation  all  the  demands  of  the  Social  Demo- 
cratic party  were  in  vain  as  regards  construc- 
tive action;  though  they  obviously  were  the 
driving  force  which  finally  converted  the  Gov- 
ernment. But  when,  finally,  the  Government 
was  convinced,  progress  started  and  proceeded 
until  the  results  were  accomplished. 

Entirely  the  reverse  is  the  development  and 
introduction  of  a  new  idea  in  a  democratic 
nation,  as  ours.  There  is  no  strong  federal  Gov- 
ernment which  could  force  new  ideas  on  the 
nation  by  governmental  order,  and  even  if  laws 
could  be  passed  to  this  purpose  they  would 
either  be  declared  unconstitutional  or  remain  a 
dead  letter,  like  so  many  of  our  laws. 

A  new  idea,  a  proposition  toward  progress, 
etc.,  is  suggested  by  individuals.  It  spreads 
and  is  discussed  by  groups  of  individuals,  and 
when  it  has  made  sufficient  progress  it  is  tried 
locally  by  groups  of  individuals,  local  societies, 
corporations,  or  municipalities.  Other  private 
or  public  groups  also  try  constructively  the  new 
idea,  usually  in  a  different  form,  and  finally  it 
is  tried  in  many  different  places,  by  many  kinds 
of  organizations.  Thus  vocational  education 
is  being  tried  to-day  in  our  nation.    There  is  an 

145 


MIERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

enormous  waste  of  energy  by  duplication  of 
work,  by  repeating  tlie  same  mistakes,  etc.,  but 
gradually  the  more  serious  errors  are  recog- 
nized and  avoided,  the  experience  of  previous 
constructive  work  is  made  at  least  partly  avail- 
able in  later  attempts.  With  the  spreading  of 
the  idea  it  reaches  larger  organizations;  na- 
tional societies,  state  governments,  groups  of 
corporations,  or  entire  industries.  The  results 
and  methods  of  procedure  are  codified  and  in- 
formation is  exchanged,  and  when  finally  the  new 
idea  reaches  the  national  Government  it  has 
been  fairly  well  crystallized  into  the  final  form 
in  which  it  is  feasible,  and  dangerous  errors  and 
mistakes  are  eliminated,  and  if  the  federal  Gov- 
ernment takes  action,  it  practically  consists  in 
what  may  be  called  standardizing  best  practice. 
But  when  this  occurs,  the  new  idea  has  long 
ceased  to  be  a  new  idea,  has  permeated  all  the 
nation,  and  practically  become  a  part  of  the 
national  economy. 

This  democratic  method  is  very  inefficient, 
very  slow  in  accomplishing  results,  and  very 
discouraging  compared  with  the  rapidity  with 
which  progress  is  possible  in  a  centralized  mon- 
archical nation.  It  has,  however,  the  advan- 
tage that  when  results  are  at  last  accomplished 

146 


DEMOCRACY  AND  MONARCHY 

they  are  permanent,  are  a  part  of  the  nation, 
and  especially — and  this  is  the  most  important 
advantage — no  great  mistakes  can  be  made,  as 
the  first  constructive  trials  are  on  a  small  scale, 
and  thus  any  errors  and  mistakes  limited  in 
extent,  and  when  the  idea  becomes  national  in 
scope,  all  serious  errors  have  been  eliminated 
by  the  experience  of  constructive  work  in  smaller 
scope. 

Thus  the  monarchical  method  is  superior  by 
getting  quicker  results,  but  a  mistake  is  liable 
to  be  a  national  disaster.  The  democratic 
method  is  slow,  but  safe.  An  illustration  hereof 
is  social  legislation.  We  realize  that  the  most 
serious  problem  before  our  nation,  which  must 
be  solved  before  we  can  hope  for  ejQBcient  indus- 
trial reorganization,  is  to  secure  the  active  co- 
operation of  the  masses,  those  who  are  becom- 
ing increasingly  indifferent,  if  not  antagonistic, 
to  the  maintenance  of  existing  society.  The 
German  Government  has  solved  this  problem 
by  eliminating  the  three  great  fears  of  the 
masses  by  an  effective  social  legislation.  The 
result  was  that  when  called  upon  for  national 
defense  even  the  "revolutionary"  Social  Dem- 
ocratic party,  with  its  millions  of  members, 
stood  solidly — and  actively — behind  the  Gov- 

147 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

ernment,  a  plienomenon  little  understood  in 
other  nations,  even  by  the  socialists.  We  have 
been  muddling  with  this  problem  for  half  a 
generation,  and  conditions  are  becoming  more 
unsatisfactory,  rather  than  better.  Here  the 
monarchical  method  seems  to  have  shown  a 
vast  superiority,  accomplished  results,  where  we 
have  failed  thus  far.  But  was  it  really  so.f^  Be- 
fore Germany  started  its  successful  social  legis- 
lation it  had  tried,  under  Bismarck,  to  solve  the 
problem,  in  the  true  monarchical  way,  by  for- 
cibly suppressing  the  elements  which  were  be- 
coming indifferent  and  antagonistic,  and  had 
split  the  nation  in  twain,  made  millions  open- 
ly hostile  to  the  nation.  At  the  end  of  the 
ten  years'  war  against  socialism,  when  revo- 
lutionary socialism  had  even  entered  and  per- 
meated the  army,  if  then  Germany  had  been 
involved  in  a  serious  war  it  would  have  gone  to 
pieces  at  the  first  blow.  All  that  would  have 
happened  which  those  unfamiliar  with  the 
changed  social  conditions  of  Germany  expected 
to  happen  and  failed  to  see  at  the  beginning  of 
the  present  war. 

Thus  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  democratic 
method — from  the  intHvidual  toward  the  cen- 
tral Government — "concentral,"  is  inferior,  nor 

lis 


DEMOCRACY  AND  MONARCHY 

that  it  is  superior  to  the  "decentral"  monar- 
chical method — from  tlie  central  Government 
toward  the  individual. 

But  it  can  be  said  that  the  decentral  method 
is  the  only  feasible  and  only  possible  one  for  a 
nation  of  monarchical  temperament — that  is, 
for  an}^  of  the  large  European  nations,  and  the 
concentral  method  is  the  only  feasible  one  for 
a  nation  of  democratic  temperament  like  ours, 
and  decentral  methods  thus  are  unsuitable  and 
impossible  for  a  democratic  nation — that  is,  we 
cannot  copy  Europe's  successful  methods  and 
hope  to  succeed. 

Our  nation  is  the  only  large  democratic  na- 
tion, thus  we  have  no  example  which  we  can 
follow,  and  the  problem  of  our  industrial  re- 
organization thus  is  a  far  vaster  one  than  it 
appears  at  first;  we  have  to  find  new  ways  and 
means,  accomplish  a  thing  which  has  never  been 
accomplished  before — co-operative  organization 
of  a  democratic  nation.  Democracy  itself  thus 
is  on  trial  before  the  judgment  of  history;  if  we 
fail,  democratic  America  ends  as  a  world  power, 
is  an  unsuccessful  experiment  in  the  world's 
history,  and  the  world  goes  back  to  monarchical 
forms  of  organization — even  if  they  shoidd  call 
their  ruler  "President,"  and  play  at  elections. 

119
