PUBLIC  AND   PRIVATE   CORPORATIONS 

OUR  governments,  as  now  constituted,  are 
not  adapted  for  eflScient  constructive 
work.  The  smaller  the  governmental  organi- 
zation and  the  more,  therefore,  there  is  an  op- 
portunity for  constructive  work,  in  a  democratic 
nation,  the  more  this  is  evident.  Much  efficient 
constructive  work  has  been  done  by  the  Federal 
Government;  the  Panama  Canal,  the  reclama- 
tion work,  our  Army  and  Navy,  as  far  as  they 
have  been  left  free  from  civilian — that  is,  politi- 
cal— interference.  Some  constructive  work  also 
has  been  done  by  States,  but  it  rarely  has  been 
characterized  by  economic  efficiency;  compare 
the  building  of  the  New  York  State  Barge 
Canal  with  that  of  the  Panama  Canal.  In  the 
smallest  political  organization  —  municipality, 
township,  or  village — inefficiency,  waste,  and 
incompetency  have  been  customary,  except 
in  those  rare  cases  where  one  strong  man  got 

132 


PUBLIC  AND   PRIVATE  CORPORATIONS 

control  and  remained  in  control  for  a  sufficiently 
long  time  to  accomplish  results;  but  then  it  was 
not  democracy,  but  Ca^sarism,  or  "bossism,"  as 
we  call  it,  which  scored. 

The  reason  which  is  usually  given  for  the  in- 
efficiency of  our  municipal  governments  is  their 
control  by  politicians,  the  control  of  the  elec- 
tions by  the  political  party  machines,  and  a 
strong  and  increasing  sentiment  has  arisen 
among  the  better  class  of  citizens,  toward  im- 
proving the  efficiency  of  the  municipal  govern- 
ment, by  change  of  the  form  of  government. 
Various  forms  of  such  reform  government  have 
been  devised,  as  "commission  government," 
"city  manager  government,"  etc. 

The  general  characteristics  of  these  reform 
governments  are: 

A  longer  term  of  office,  five  or  even  seven 
years  instead  of  the  two  years'  term  now  cus- 
tomary in  most  municipalities. 

Elimination  of  the  periodic  complete  change 
of  the  government;  at  every  election  only  a 
part  of  the  officers  is  changed,  and  a  greater 
continuity  of  the  administrative  body  is  thus 
secured. 

Much  greater  power,  authority,  and  respon- 
sibility of  the  officers. 

133 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

A  small  number  of  elective  officials. 

Election  by  persons,  without  recognition  of 
political  parties. 

Elimination  of  district  representation  by 
choosing  all  officers  by  election  from  the  com- 
munity at  large. 

Referendum  and  recall. 

The  last  feature,  however,  is  objected  to  by 
many  conservative  citizens,  as  dangerously 
radical,  and  thus  not  included  in  many  com- 
mission governments. 

The  experience  was  that  such  commission 
governments,  when  introduced,  almost  always 
were  successful  in  the  opinion  of  the  leading 
citizens,  gave  a  great  increase  in  economy  and 
efficiency  of  the  municipal  government,  an  ab- 
sence of  control  by  political  bosses  and  party 
machines;  in  short,  were  a  great  step  in  ad- 
vance. 

But  now  many  of  these  commission  govern- 
ments have  been  in  existence  for  a  considerable 
number  of  years,  and  from  these  reports  come 
in  which  are  not  always  favorable,  and  claims 
have  been  made  regarding  some  commission 
governments  that  they  are  more  inefficient  and 
unsatisfactory  than  the  political  government 
which  they  replaced,  and  some  communities  have 

134 


PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  CORPORATIONS 

abandoned  commission  government  and  gone 
back  to  the  old  form  of  government. 

The  question  then  arises  whether  the  economic 
success  of  the  change  from  political  to  commis- 
sion government  was  really  due  to  the  form  of 
the  new  government,  or  whether  it  was  merely 
the  result  of  the  change  which  disorganized  the 
forces  that  made  for  ineflSciency  and  waste. 
Gradually  during  the  years  these  forces  adapted 
themselves  to  the  new  form  of  government,  got 
control  of  it,  and  it  became  just  as  bad  as  the 
previous  form,  or  even  worse,  due  to  the  greater 
power  of  the  officials  and  their  longer  term  of 
office,  which  increased  their  irresponsibility. 

Municipal  government  by  party  machines 
controlled  by  irresponsible  political  bosses  is 
bad;  but  it  is  a  rather  significant  fact  that 
where  the  citizens  "rose  in  their  might  and 
turned  the  rascals  out,"  and  elected  a  reform 
government,  fusion  government,  citizens  ticket, 
etc.,  such  government  often  has  been  worse 
than  the  "corrupt"  political  government  which 
it  replaced,  and  incompetency,  political  and  so- 
cial inexperience,  and  reformatory  hobbies  have 
resulted  in  still  greater  inefficiency  and  waste. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  our  coimtry's 
greatest  city  has  for  a  century  been  controlled 

135 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

by  the  same  irresponsible  and  "  corrupt "  political 
organization,  and  however  often  reform  move- 
ments have  wrested  the  power  from  the  hands 
of  Tammany  Hall,  it  has  always  come  back, 
and  often  with  such  an  avalanche  as  to  leave 
no  doubt  of  the  failure  of  the  reform  government. 

There  may  be  some  reason  in  this;  the  polit- 
ical boss  desires  to  remain  in  power,  the  political 
machine  expects  to  be  in  existence  and  retain 
its  control  for  generations,  and  this  means  some 
responsibility,  however  indirect.  It  imposes  a 
control  and  limitation  in  the  abuse  of  power, 
which  does  not  exist  with  the  individual  re- 
former who  is  not  restrained  by  any  responsible 
power  from  carrying  out  his  ideas,  whatever 
they  may  be.  It  again  is  significant  that  where 
fusion  administrations  by  several  parties  have 
won  elections,  almost  always  every  one  of  the 
"fused"  parties  have  disclaimed  responsibility 
for  the  elected  officials. 

The  great  trouble  with  political  reform  is 
that  it  is  rarely  based  on  successful  practical 
experience,  but  rather  represents  the  academic 
reasoning  of  well-meaning,  but  often  rather  in- 
experienced and  impractical,  dreamers. 

The  logical  and,  therefore,  most  promising, 
and,  at  the  same  time;,  most  natural  method  of 

136 


rUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  CORrORATIONS 

remedying  unsatisfactory  results,  is  to  look 
around  where  the  same  or  similar  conditions 
exist,  but  the  results  are  satisfactory,  and  then 
apply,  or  adapt,  the  methods  which  have  given 
satisfactory  results,  to  the  conditions  where  the 
results  have  been  unsatisfactory.  It  is  strange 
that  in  all  the  agitation  for  improving  the  ef- 
ficiency of  the  municipal  corporation,  in  all  the 
studies  of  commission  government,  municipal 
charters,  etc.,  very  little  thought  has  been  given 
to  those  forms  of  government  which  have  proven 
satisfactory,  efficient,  and  economical— the  gov- 
ernments of  the  industrial  corporations. 

The  municipality  is  a  public  corporation, 
owned  and  governed  by  the  citizens;  the  indus- 
trial corporation  is  a  private  corporation,  owned 
and  operated  by  the  stockholders.  In  size  and 
capitalization,  many  industrial  corporations  are 
far  larger  than  the  average  municipal  corpora- 
tion; many  smaller.  Thus  there  is  no  essential 
difference  in  size.  But  the  municipal  corpora- 
tion, as  a  rule,  is  inefficient;  the  private  corpo- 
ration efficient.  What,  then,  is  the  difference 
in  their  government  which  makes  the  difference 
between  efficiency  and  inefficiency?  The  fre- 
quent elections,  the  short  term  of  office,  two 
years,  in  the  municipal  corporation  is  consid- 

137 


AMERICA  AND  THE   NEW  EPOCH 

ered  one  of  the  causes  of  inefficiency,  and  in 
commission  government  charters  we  thus  ex- 
tend the  office  term  to  five  years.  But  the 
industrial  corporation  elects  its  directors  every 
year,  thus  has  a  still  shorter  office  term,  and 
still  it  is  efficient!  District  representation  is 
another  alleged  cause  for  inefficiency,  and  there- 
fore often  eliminated  by  reform  charters,  and 
all  officers  chosen  from  the  city  at  large.  But 
every  corporation  which  owns  a  number  of  fac- 
tories has  representatives  of  its  different  fac- 
tories, of  its  different  manufacturing  interests, 
its  different  other  activities  in  its  governing 
boards.  Referendum  and  recall  are  considered 
dangerously  radical  novelties  by  many;  but 
their  principle  is  old  and  stale  in  the  corpora- 
tions, and  every  board  of  directors,  every  officer, 
would  resign  at  any  time  on  demand  of  the 
majority  of  the  stockholders. 

What,  then,  is  the  difference  between  corpo- 
ration government  and  municipal  government 
which  gives  the  former  the  efficiency  not  pos- 
sessed by  the  latter.'^  In  the  corporation,  at 
every  election,  every  director,  every  officer,  is  re- 
elected, as  a  matter  of  course,  unless  the  owners 
— in  this  case,  the  stockholders — are  very  much 
dissatisfied  with  the  management  of  the  cor- 

138 


PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  CORPORATIONS 

poration,  and  desire  to  make  a  radical  change, 
and  this  occurs  very  rarely.  In  the  municipality, 
however,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  officers  are 
not  re-elected,  no  matter  how  much  the  owners 
— the  citizens — are  satisfied,  but  it  is  customary 
to  change  officers  at  every  election,  except  in 
rare  cases. 

Thus  the  corporation  government  is  contin- 
uous, and  thereby  efficient;  the  officer  knows 
that  if  he  acts  right  he  will  remain  in  office  as 
long  as  he  wishes.  He  can,  therefore,  plan  and 
organize,  and  accomplish  results.  The  annual 
election  thus  is  essentially  an  official  referendum 
and  recall  vote,  insuring  the  responsibility  and 
response  of  the  officers  to  the  owners'  interests. 

Compare  this  continuity  of  management  with 
the  biennial  overthrow  and  more  or  less  com- 
plete change  of  all  the  administrative  and  ex- 
ecutive organization,  policy,  and  experience, 
occurring  in  the  municipality,  and  the  reason 
of  the  inefficiency  of  the  latter,  the  efficiency 
of  the  former  is  given.  Unfortunately,  the  tend- 
encies for  governmental  reform  are  very  little 
in  this  direction  in  which  efficiency  has  been 
proven,  but  rather  are  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion, to  lengthen  the  office  terms — thereby  in- 
creasing the  irresponsibility — and  to  discourage 

139 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

re-election,  often  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make 
it  illegal;  as  if  it  were  not  the  most  foolish  thing 
imaginable,  if  you  have  a  man  who  is  competent 
to  do  a  thing,  has  the  experience,  and  is  willing 
to  do  it,  to  put  him  out  of  the  office  and  put  a 
new  man  in  who  has  no  experience.  The  argu- 
ment that  it  is  dangerous  to  re-elect  the  same 
man  many  times,  since  he  may  establish  him- 
self permanently  in  power,  might  have  had  some 
justice  in  the  days  of  Washington,  but  certainly 
is  silly  to-day. 

Thus,  to  make  our  present  municipal  gov- 
ernments most  efficient,  as  efficient  as  corpo- 
ration governments,  would  require  abandon- 
ment of  the  custom  of  changing  officers  at  every 
election  in  favor  of  the  custom  of  re-electing 
the  same  men  as  long  as  they  are  reasonably 
satisfactory,  after  picking  out  good  and  efficient 
men  at  first.  But  no  change  of  the  form  of 
municipal  government  is  required,  except,  per- 
haps, that  to  annual  election  instead  of  biennial. 

However,  the  custom  of  rotation  in  office — 
often  for  the  distribution  of  spoils — is  so  inborn 
in  our  nation,  has  so  much  become  a  habit,  from 
the  early  Colonial  days  when  it  was  the  natural 
way,  that  it  does  not  appear  probable  that  it 
could  be  changed,  at  least,  not  very  soon;   but 

110 


PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  CORPORATIONS 

as  long  as  this  is  not  done  our  municipal  govern- 
ment will  remain  inferior  to  our  corporation 
government,  in  constructive  work,  no  matter 
what  other  improvements  are  made  in  our  po- 
litical governments. 

Very  few  of  the  improvements  proposed  in 
the  government  of  our  municipalities  are  new; 
most  of  them  are  old  and  long  established  in 
the  industrial  corporation  governments.  For 
instance,  proportional  representation  and  mi- 
nority representation.  It  does  not  exist  in  most 
public  elections.  A  small  change  in  the  vote, 
therefore,  shifts  majority  to  minority,  and  catas- 
trophically  reverses  all  governmental  policies, 
as  the  result  of  an  insignificant  percentage  of 
voters  changing  their  views  and  thereby  con- 
verting a  narrow  majority  into  a  minority.  As 
a  matter  of  course,  everj^  efficient  corporation 
has  always  given  representation  in  the  board  of 
directors  to  any  minority  of  stockholders  large 
enough  to  be  entitled  thereto;  it  would  not 
have  been  efficient,  thus  would  have  been  an 
economic  disadvantage  to  exclude  a  minority 
from  representing  their  views  in  the  board,  and 
proportional  representation,  which  includes  mi- 
nority representation,  has  always  been  the  aim 
of  corporation  management.
