XIII 

evolution:  industrial  government 

HIE  large  industrial  corporation  is  to-day  by 
far  the  most  efficient  organization,  in  spite 
of  the  inefficiency  forced  upon  it  by  the  political 
Government.  It  is  still  very  crude  and  imperfect 
in  many  respects,  and  especially  it  is  still  greatly 
deficient  in  the  social  relations  within  the  organi- 
zation and  toward  the  general  public.  If  an 
efficient  co-operative  government  is  to  be  built 
up  from  the  industrial  corporations,  the  in- 
dustrial corporation  must  first  become  united 
within  itself — that  is,  the  indifference  and  an- 
tagonij?in  within  the  corporation  must  be  over- 
come, and  the  same  co-operative  feeling  brought 
about  between  the  shop  force  and  the  adminis- 
tration which  exists  and  always  has  existed  in 
most  corporations  between  the  office  force  and 
the  administration.  That  is,  the  welfare  of  the 
corporation  must  be  made  just  as  nuich  to  the 
interest  of  the  shop  force  as  it  is  to  the  interest 

161 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

of  the  office  force.  Not  that  there  should  be  no 
differences  of  interest  between  individual  em- 
ployee and  corporation;  differences  of  interest 
exist  and  will  remain  among  the  office  men  as 
well  as  in  the  shops.  But  those  hundred  thou- 
sands who  only  two  years  ago  were  thrown  out 
of  work  by  the  business  depression,  were  willing 
to  work,  but  for  many  months  could  find  no 
work,  and  saw  their  few  dollars  which  they  had 
saved,  spent;  those  who  had  started  paying  for 
a  small  home  and  saw  all  that  they  had  accom- 
plished gone  by  the  foreclosure  of  the  mortgage, 
saw  their  families  scattered  and  thrown  upon 
charity,  and  all  this  without  any  fault  of  their 
own — to  them  existing  society  cannot  appeal  as 
the  best  possible  one;  they  can  hardly  be  ex- 
pected to  feel  interested  in  tlie  maintenance  of 
a  society  in  which  they  are  treated  thus,  cannot 
be  patriotic  in  the  defense  of  these  conditions; 
neither  can  the  other  hundred  thousands  or  mil- 
lions, who  have  escaped  this  time,  but  have  the 
possibility  of  the  same  fate  hanging  over  them. 
Thus  the  assurance  of  work  when  capaljle  of 
working,  the  insurance  of  a  living  in  their  ac- 
customed standard  when  not  capable  of  work- 
ing, are  the  fundamental  requisites  to  secure 
interest  in  the  maintenance  of  existing  condi- 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

tions  witlioiit  which  there  can  be  no  real  pa- 
triotism, no  real  co-operation. 

This  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  broader 
question  of  socialism — that  is,  of  the  elimination 
of  capital.  Socialism  has  as  many  followers  in 
the  offices  of  our  corporations  as  it  has  in  the 
shops,  and  in  no  way  precludes  co-operation 
within  the  corporation;  indeed,  in  some  respects 
the  corporation  may  be  considered  as  the  first 
step  toward  socialism,  and  the  industrial  gov- 
ernment of  the  nation  by  the  united  corpora- 
tions as  preliminary  and  crude  form  of  socialistic 
society. 

But  assuming  the  corporation  united  within 
itself,  the  public  sentiment  sufficiently  educated 
to  stop  political  government  from  its  disorgan- 
izing activities,  nothing  would  stand  in  the  way 
then  of  organizing  an  efficient  system  of  co- 
operative industrial  production,  not  by  some 
man's  superior  organizing  power,  but  in  the 
natural  trend  of  industrial  development. 

With  absorption  of  smaller  corporations  by 
larger  ones,  and  consolidation  to  still  larger 
corporations,  the  development  proceeds  until 
the  industry  is  organized  in  one  or  a  small  num- 
ber of  very  large  corporations.  There  is  no 
competition,   but   an    executive   committee   of 

1()0 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

representatives  of  the  corporations  or  branches 
of  corporations  engaged  in  the  same  and  similar 
in(iustries  co-ordinates  and  correlates  the  work 
of  the  corporations,  decides  on  production,  on 
prices,  policies,  etc.  Executive  committees 
with  their  members  chosen  from  different  in- 
dustries take  care  of  the  co-operation  of  these 
industries,  and  finally  an  Industrial  Senate  as  the 
supreme  executive  committee  co-ordinates,  con- 
trols, and  directs  all  the  country's  industries — 
that  is,  governs  the  country.  Thus,  an  indus- 
trial government  would  be  established  with  an 
authority  greater  than  the  world  has  ever  seen, 
and  still  without  any  mandatory  power,  not, 
maintained  by  a  police  force,  but  based  on! 
mutual  co-operation  for  everybody's  interest.- 
Any  corporation  which  does  not  wish  to  join 
or  take  part  in  the  national  industrial  organi- 
zation is  free  to  stay  outside,  as  long  as  it  con- 
forms to  the  universal  policy,  but  if  the  outsider 
refuses  to  co-operate,  co-operation  is  withdrawn 
from  him,  also,  as  "outlaw"  or  "scab"  corpo- 
ration, to  use  the  expression  of  labor  organiza- 
tions. That  is,  the  organized  industries  refuse 
to  do  any  work  for  such  an  outlaw,  or  have  any- 
thing to  do  with  any  work  containing  the  prod- 
uct of  the  outlaw  corporation.    Rapid  extinction 

167 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

of  such  outlaw  would  obviously  be  the  result, 
without  any  legal  or  mandatory  power  being 
necessary.  If  we  realize  how  excessive  capitali- 
zation of  otherwise  conservative  corporations 
has  been  forced,  by  the  necessity  of  buying  up 
competitors  at  exaggerated  values  based  on 
their  potential  destructiveness  as  competitors; 
how  corporations  have  been  organized  for  the 
mere  purpose  of  holding  up  existing  corporations 
for  an  excessive  price  in  selling  out — it  is  obvious 
that  prompt  elimination  of  any  body  attempt- 
ing similar  action  is  necessary  in  the  interest  of 
the  general  industrial  welfare  of  the  nation. 

There  is  a  certain  glamour,  to  some  minds,  in 
the  attitude  of  the  one  who  defies  the  majority; 
the  "American  hero"  who  goes  as  strike- 
breaker to  work  where  the  organized  employees 
strike;  the  individual  manufacturer  who  breaks 
price  agreements  and  undersells  the  others,  to 
get  the  business  at  prices  which  conservative 
producers  cannot  meet,  as  they  leave  no  margin 
of  fair  profit.  But  there  is  practically  never  any 
moral  issue  behind  the  action  of  the  scab, 
whether  individual  or  corporation,  but  it  is  the 
sordid  attempt  of  getting  an  individual  advan- 
tage at  the  cost  of  the  others.    It  is  the  opposite 

of  co-operation,  and  no  efficient  industrial  sys- 

i(;8 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

tern  can  he  built  up,  as  long  as  sucli  altitude 
has  any  chance  to  succeed  even  temporarily. 
— How  would  the  officers  of  such  national  gov- 
ernment by  the  co-operative  organization  of  the 
industrial  corporations  be  chosen?/'  By  popular 
election?  Imagine  the  chief  engineer  of  a  man- 
ufacturing company  elected  by  the  majority 
vote  of  all  the  employees!  Or  the  general  man- 
ager, or  the  comptroller,  or  chemist,  or  bacteri- 
ologist, the  mathematician,  or  designing  engi- 
neer; it  would  not  be  democratic,  but  it  would 
be  chaotic.  Not  one-tenth  of  the  emj)loyces 
are  engineers  and  therefore  capable  of  judging 
on  the  engineering  qualifications,  and  their  vote 
in  electing  the  chief  engineer  would  mean  noth- 
ing; the  elected  officer  almost  certainly  would  be 
incompetent  for  his  work,  and  the  same  applies 
to  every  other  profession.  Thus,  where  pro- 
fessional qualification  is  required  by  the  office, 
popular  election  is  impossible.  But  professional 
qualification  is  required  for  practically  every 
officer  within  the  industrial  organization;  nay, 
some  qualification — professional,  physical,  or 
otherwise — is  needed  for  almost  every  indus- 
trial position,  from  the  unskilled  laborer  to  the 
president,  and  popular  election  thus  is  impossi- 
ble for  any  industrial  position.    It  would  mean 

169 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

something  only  if  every  elector  can  personally 
satisfy  himself  that  the  candidate  has  the  re- 
quired qualifications,  and  this  is  not  possible, 
since  no  elector  can  judge  on  the  qualification 
of  every  position,  and  if  he  could  the  mere 
amount  of  time  required  to  do  so  would  exclude 
the  possibility. 

Granting,  as  the  fundamental  principle  of 
democracy,  that  every  citizen  has  the  same 
right,  the  same  voice  and  vote  in  the  Government 
— and  no  nation  like  ours  can  continue  success- 
ful without  conceding  this  fundamental  prin- 
ciple— it  means  that  popular  vote  by  majority 
must  decide  all  general  questions,  all  matters  of 
policy  which  are  of  interest  to  every  citizen, 
which  every  citizen  can  discuss  and  judge,  such 
as  the  questions  whether  women  should  vote  as 
well  as  men,  whether  our  nation  is  ready  and 
willing  to  police  our  entire  continent  and  force 
its  unruly  Spanish-American  republics  to  keep 
order  and  peace;  but  majority  vote  cannot 
decide  professional  questions  or  questions  of 
fact,  such  as  whether  vaccination  is  necessary 
to  protect  us  against  smallpox  epidemics, 
whether  battle-ships  or  submarines  are  more 
eflFective,  or  whether  some  water-power  can  be 
developed  economically  or  not. 

170 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

Indeed,  even  the  most  radical  exponent  of 
unlimited  majority  voting  realizes  this.  He  may 
claim  tliat  everything  should  be  done  and  de- 
cided by  the  majority  vote,  ma^^  in  city  gov- 
ernment demand  that  every  administrative  de- 
tail h>i  brought  to  decision  by  majority  vote, 
that  e  very  city  employee  from  the  mayor  to  the 
unskilled  laborer  be  elected;  but  if  he  himself 
is  sick,  he  does  not  go  before  the  political  body 
and  ask  to  elect  a  physician  for  him — but  he 
himself  chooses  a  physician  in  whose  profes- 
sional qualifications  he  has  confidence.  Or  if 
his  child  is  sick  he  would  not  think  of  asking  the 
organization  to  vote  whether  it  is  measles  or 
scarlet  fever,  but  he  takes  the  decision  of  a  single 
physician  in  preference  to  any  majority  vote. 

Should  the  industrial  officials,  then,  be  ap- 
pointed? But  who  appoints  the  appointer.^^ 
Within  certain  limits,  however,  in  offices  re- 
quiring professional  qualifications,  appointment 
gives  better  results.  In  a  medium-sized  town, 
for  instance,  the  administration  may  employ  a 
thousand  people.  If  they  all  were  elected  not 
a  single  elector  could  devote  enough  time  to 
find  out  the  qualifications  of  every  candidate 
for  every  place — even  if  he  were  capable  pro- 
fessionally to  judge  on  it.    The  result  could  be 

171 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

imagined.  But  the  mayor  can  devote  enough 
time  to  select,  by  investigation  and  consulta- 
tion with  competent  men  in  each  profession, 
reasonably  competent  men  as  heads  of  depart- 
ments; they,  in  the  same  manner,  can  select 
and  appoint  subheads,  and  so  on,  and  a  reason- 
able administrative  efficiency  could  be  secu  red — 
if  the  mayor  is  not  prejudiced  or  led  by  motives 
other  than  administrative  efficiency. 

But  herein  lies  the  weak  point  of  the  method 
of  choosing  officers  by  appointment :  it  is  so  easy 
to  abuse  it  for  selfish  purposes,  for  private  or 
particularistic  interests,  to  select  from  a  narrow 
circle  of  personal  or  political  friends,  to  abuse 
it  for  paying  political  or  private  debts.  Per- 
sonal inclination,  if  not  prejudice  of  the  ap- 
pointing officer,  has  too  large  influence,  and,  at 
the  best,  gradually  the  method  of  appointment 
leads  into  control  of  the  offices  by  a  clique,  a 
political  machine,  or  group. 

Thus  neither  majority  election  nor  appoint- 
ment is  capable  of  giving  efficient  qualified  offi- 
cers, such  as  are  necessary  in  the  complex 
structure  of  modern  industrial  civilization. 

There  remains  a  third  method — to  have  the 
officer  elect  himself  for  the  office,  or,  as  we 
usually  say,  "rise  from  the  ranks."    It  is  the 

172 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

method  which  has  been  so  successful  in  the 
modern  industrial  corporations,  especially  in 
the  office  force,  and  has  given  it  the  efficient, 
centralized,  and  at  the  same  time  flexible  and 
'  progressive  organization.  It  means  that  largely 
every  employee  makes  his  own  job.  If  he  can 
do  larger  work  than  his  position  requires,  he 
does  it,  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  is  allowed  to 
do  it,  as  it  improves  the  efficiency  of  the  depart- 
D^'-nts  in  which  he  works,  and  thereby  the  rep- 
utation  of  his  superior  officers.  Thereby  he  is 
virtually  in  a  higher  position,  and  the  recogni- 
tion thereof,  by  title  and  pay,  follows  as  a  mat- 
ter of  course.  Thus  we  see  in  progressive  in- 
dustrial corporations  people  rise  to  higher  and 
higher  positions,  beyond  those  at  whose  side 
they  started,  not  by  election,  not  by  appoint- 
ment or  "pull,"  but  by  their  own  work,  intelli- 
gence, and  ability.  Thus  we  also  see,  especially 
in  those  industrial  corporations  which  require 
a  considerable  number  of  skilled  or  professional 
men,  positions  created  or  rather  creating  them- 
selves, and  men  taking  up  work  useful  to  the 
corporation  which  was  not  done  before,  or  not 
done  in  the  same  manner,  and  that  in  the  office 
as  well  as  in  the  shops,  and  in  every  such  corpo- 
ration we  can  find  men  in  offices  which  were 

173 


AMERICA   AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

created  for  them — often  will  cease  when  they 
drop  out.  This  is  not  always  realized  by  the 
outsider,  and  it  applies  not  only  to  a  few  excep- 
tional men,  but  to  very  many  in  all  ranks.  It 
gives  a  chance  for  initiative  and  individual 
development  within  the  corporation,  which  is 
now  found  very  rarely  outside,  and  is  one  of 
the  most  important  factors  of  progress. 

Thus  more  and  more  positions  are  filled,  not 
by  appointment  by  a  superior  officer,  but  by 
the  man  starting  to  do  the  work,  doing  it  more 
and  more,  and  so  virtually  electing  himself  into 
the  position — and  the  final  appointment  then 
merely  legalizes  the  established  fact. 

Naturally,  this  is  not  always  the  case,  but 
equally  often  some  man  who  shows  qualifica- 
tions superior  to  those  required  for  his  position 
is  tried  in  some  entirely  different  higher  posi- 
tion where  these  qualifications  are  desired. 

Thus,  to-day  there  is  no  place  where  the 
chances  are  so  good  for  every  man  to  reach  the 
highest  power,  to  rise  to  the  highest  position 
which  he  is  capable  of  filling,  as  in  the  large  in- 
dustrial corporation. 

Naturally,  we  must  realize,  as  stated  before, 
that  the  corporate  organizations  are  still  crude 
and  imperfect,  and  that  there  are  many  chances 

174 


EVOLUTION:    INDUSTRIAL  GOVERNMENT 

to  "get  lost,"  to  get  into  "dead-alley  positions" 
and  stay  there  forever,  but  this  is  getting  less 
and  less  with  the  increasing  development  of 
the  industrial  corporation.  Increased  efforts  are 
made  to  guard  against  it,  as  it  is  uneconomical 
for  the  corporation  to  use  men  in  positions  in- 
ferior to  those  which  they  could  fill.  Thus  re- 
search laboratories  have  been  established  for 
men  showing  that  they  could  do  valuable  re- 
search work;  new  lines  of  manufacture  started 
because  men  happened  to  be  specially  interested 
and  capable  in  that  direction,  departments  di- 
vided or  consolidated  to  suit  the  personalities 
of  eni})lo3'ees — that  is,  to  use  them  at  their  best 
efficiency — and  the  industrial  corporation  is  far 
from  the  inflexible,  rigid  machine  which  it  ap- 
l)cars  to  the  outsider,  who  is  not  familiar  with 
its  working;  it  is  this  flexibility  which  gives  it 
the  economic  power  and  strength. 

In  the  national  Government  by  the  co- 
operative organization  of  corporations,  there 
could  thus  be  no  election  of  officers,  nor  ap- 
pointment, but  the  offices  would  fill  them- 
selves by  men  rising  into  them,  following  the 
best  practice  of  our  present  corporations.  The 
men  interested  in  engineering  would  naturally 

drift    into    engineering    positions,    those    with 
^^  175 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

administrative  ability  into  administrative  po- 
sitions; those  with  knowledge  and  experience 
beyond  the  individual  industry,  into  the  field 
of  correlation  between  the  industries;  the  most 
capable  organizers  finally  into  the  industrial 
senate.  The  whole  organism  would  be  essen- 
tially self-governing,  consisting  of  a  number  of 
groups  and  sub-groups,  and  further  sub-groups 
within  the  latter,  each  self-governing  within  its 
own  activities,  supreme  within  its  own  field  of 
activity,  subordinate  in  any  other  activity  to 
the  group  into  which  the  other  activity  be- 
longs, and  correlated  with  any  co-ordinate 
group  through  joint  committees  or  through  the 
larger  group  of  which  both  are  parts. 

There  is  nothing  new  in  such  organization, 
but  it  is  in  existence  to-day  in  many  larger 
corporations,  is  the  outgrowth  of  economic 
laws  working  on  the  individualistic  tempera- 
ment of  our  nation.  It  is  essentially  demo- 
cratic in  character;  there  is  no  autocratic  au- 
thority, but  every  member  of  the  organization 
has  a  directive  power  within  his  field  of  activity. 
I  have  seen  large  contracts  decided  or  modified 
by  the  opinion  of  a  workman  in  the  shops,  who 
had  to  state  whether  a  particular  operation 
could  be  done  easily  or  was  difficult.
