I 

ERAS   IN   THE   WORLD's   HISTORY 

WHILE  this  is  being  written  the  world's 
war  is  entering  its  third  year,  and  no 
entl  to  the  catastrophe  is  yet  in  sight. 
.  All  attempts  to  explain  the  cause  of  the  dis- 
aster have  failed:  the  assassination  of  the 
Austrian  Crown  Prince,  the  violation  of  Bel- 
gium's neutrality.  Slavish  expansion,  Prussian 
militarism,  British  greed  alike  do  not  explain. 
The  assassination  of  the  Austrian  Crown 
Prince  may  have  justified  a  punitive  expedition 
against  Servia,  but  not  that  Russia,  England, 
and  France  come  to  the  assistance  of  the 
assassins. 

The  violation  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium 
I 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

does  not  appear  acceptable  to  an  American  as 
explanation  of  England's  entrance  into  the  war. 
It  would  imply  that  the  American's  moral  sense 
is  so  inferior  to  that  of  the  Englishman  that 
the  latter  went  to  war  for  a  moral  issue,  while 
beyond  mere  academic  condemnation  not  a 
single  voice  was  raised  in  America  for  war  in 
defense  of  Belgium;  nay,  such  obligation  was 
expressly  disclaimed. 

The  battle  lines  between  Slav  and  German 
have  been  wavering  to  and  fro  in  the  East  for 
over  fifteen  centuries  without  kindling  a  world's 
war,  and  while  the  old  fight  for  the  ground,  be- 
tween Slav  and  German,  would  flare  up  with 
renewed  intensity  as  incident  of  a  world's  war, 
it  cannot  be  the  cause. 

Prussian  militarism  and  British  greed — or,  in 
the  language  of  the  neutral  mind,  German  or- 
ganization and  England's  financial  interests — as 
causes  of  the  war  explain  nothing,  but  leave  the 
questions:  What  created  Germany's  powerful 
centralized  organization?  Why  were  England's 
financial  interests  threatened  by  Germany .^^ 

W^ith  the  failure  of  finding  a  satisfactory 
cause  for  the  war  we  are  forced  to  realize  that 
we  stand  before  one  of  those  inevitable  catas- 
trophes in  the  liistory  of  the  human  race,  that 


ERAS  IN  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY 

we  are  passing  through  one  of  those  historical 
epochs  which  have  clianged  the  organization  of 
human  society,  an  epoch  Hke  that  which,  begin- 
ning in  the  August  night  of  1789,  with  the 
declaration  of  the  rights  of  man,  liberie,  egal- 
ite,  f rater 7iiie,  and  ending  on  the  battle-field  of 
Waterloo,  changed  the  world  from  feudalism 
to  industrial  capitalism,  or  that  earlier  epoch 
of  the  migration  of  the  German  tribes,  which 
buried  the  classic  civilization  of  ancient  times 
under  the  ruins  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  es- 
tablished the  feudal  society  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
or  that  still  earlier  epoch  before  the  dawn  of 
history  when  the  Aryan  migration  ended  the 
neolithic  age  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
classic  civilization. 

We  know  nothing  about  the  social  condition 
before  the  Aryan  migration.  When  the  Aryans 
came  they  came  as  conquerors,  the  conquered 
autochthons  became  rightless  slaves,  Helots,  la- 
boring for  the  conqueror-citizens  as  masters, 
and  so  all  ancient  civilization,  Egypt  and  Baby- 
lon, Hellas  and  the  Macedonian  empires,  and 
finally  their  culmination  in  the  Roman  Empire, 
were  based  on  slavery — a  rightless  class  of 
slaves  doing  all  the  work,  a  citizen  class  sup- 
ported by  slave  labor  and  thus  having  its  time 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

free  for  war,  administration,  or  art,  whatever 
the  national  character  and  inclination,  and  a 
class  of  free  men  without  rights  and  power,  de- 
spised alike  by  slave  and  slave-owner,  but  con- 
sidering themselves  vastly  above  the  slaves,  and 
serving  the  masters  as  slave-drivers,  managers, 
etc.{perioikoi — libertini — the  "poor  white  trash" 
of  our  own  classic  civilization  of  the  South). 

In  the  classic  era  art  rose  to  heights  never 
approached  since,  and  in  the  Roman  Empire 
was  accomplished  what  the  world  has  never 
experienced  since — universal  peace  for  several 
centuries. 

But  the  classic  era  finally  came  to  an  end, 
not  by  overthrow,  but  by  internal  decay:  the 
Roman  Empire,  based  on  the  labor  of  the 
conquered  nations,  failed  to  conserve  the  source 
of  its  strength,  the  people  which  it  exploited. 
So  nation  after  nation  was  exhausted,  while 
race  suicide  destroyed  the  ruling  classes.  So 
the  purple  passed  from  Italy  to  France;  Spain, 
the  Balkan  nations,  Africa,  and  Asia,  even  far- 
away England  supplied  emperors;  but  hardly 
any  of  the  later  Roman  emperors  was  of  Roman 
descent. 

In  the  second  great  epoch  of  human  history, 
when  the  "barbarians"  finally  destroyed  the 


ERAS  IN  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY 

Roman  Empire  and  founded  their  own  nations, 
it  was  an  empty  shell  which  they  destroyed — 
the  life  of  the  ancient  civilization  had  long 
gone  out. 

The  state  of  the  barbarians  which  overran 
the  Roman  Empire  was  the  tribal  organization, 
an  aristocratic  democracy;  that  is,  a  nation  of 
free  and  equal  citizens,  composed  of  families 
differing  more  or  less  in  social  standing,  by 
their  history,  their  prowess,  influence,  etc.,  and 
led,when  leadership  appeared  necessary, bj^  some 
prominent  male  member  of  the  most  influential 
leading  family,  but  accepting  the  leadership  vol- 
untarily, without  recognizing  any  right  to  rule. 

Such  was  the  foundation  on  which  later  feu- 
dalism was  built. 

When  these  tribes  overran  the  Roman  Em- 
pire, their  relations  to  the  conquered  "Romans" 
necessarily  were  very  different  from  those  of 
the  Aryans  to  their  predecessors.  There  could 
be  no  question  of  slavery.  The  German  bar- 
barians had  for  so  many  generations  obeyed  the 
orders  of  the  Roman  Empire,  as  servants,  aux- 
iliaries, and  mercenaries,  had  lived  so  long 
under  the  glamour  of  the  Roman  Empire,  that 
when  the  relations  reversed,  and  the  barbarians 

became  the  masters,  it  was  inconceivable  for 

5 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

them  to  make  slaves  out  of  their  former  masters, 
but  these  gradually  merged  into  and  modified 
the  barbarian  tribal  organization;  the  masses 
became  the  tillers  of  the  soil,  the  educated 
classes  acquired  a  position  within  and  still  out- 
side of  the  tribal  organization,  as  the  "clergy," 
and  so  the  feudal  societj^  of  the  Middle  Ages 
was  born,  by  the  amalgamation  of  the  con- 
quered nations  with  the  conquering  German 
barbarians. 

Feudalism  inherently  recognized  no  slavery, 
but  all  people  had  some  rights,  though  different 
according  to  their  occupation,  their  station  in 
society,  from  the  tiller  of  the  land,  who  was 
bound  to  the  soil,  to  the  lord  of  the  manor, 
who  was  supported  by  the  tribute — the  "tenth" 
— of  the  former,  but  who  in  his  turn  had  to  pro- 
tect the  former  from  enemies,  and  had  to  do 
service  to  his  overlord. 

A  permanent  classification  of  society  was 
thus  established,  with  the  three  main  classes: 
the  common  people,  or  tillers  of  the  soil  and 
artisans;  the  nobility,  or  warrior  class;  and  the 
clergy,  or  educated  class.  Each  class  was  sub- 
divided again  into  numerous  grades,  from  the 
county  squire  to  the  duke  and  king,  and  the 
"classes"  of  feudal  society  never  were  "castes," 


ERAS  IN  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY 

as  to-day  in  India,  but  there  was  always  tlie 
possibility  of  rising  from  one  class  into  a  higher 
one,  however  difficult  this  may  have  been  some 
time  in  the  later  Middle  Ages,  and  there  was 
always  the  danger  of  dropping  down  into  a 
lower  class. 

Feudalism  was  fairly  satisfactory  as  long  as 
it  remained  a  commensal  organism — that  is,  all 
classes  gave  and  received;  the  tiller  of  the  soil 
received  protection  from  the  feudal  lord  in  ex- 
change for  his  tribute  of  a  part  of  his  harvest, 
the  feudal  lord  gave  protection  to  the  tiller  of 
the  soil  in  exchange  for  the  tribute  received, 
and  gave  military  service  to  his  overlord  in 
exchange  for  protection  against  his  enemies; 
the  clergy  took  charge  of  the  intellectual  and 
religious  life,  etc. 

But  feudalism  was  an  organization  adapted 
to  an  essentially  agricultural  society,  and  there 
was  no  place  within  it  for  industry,  manufac- 
ture, and  commerce,  and  when,  in  the  later 
Middle  Ages,  arts  and  industries  developed  in 
the  cities,  when  the  crusades  and  later  on  the 
African,  Indian,  and  American  discoveries  de- 
veloped commerce,  conditions  arose  with  which 
the  feudal  organization   of  society   could  not 

cope. 

7 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

Thus  in  the  industrial  cities  of  central  Europe, 
of  Italy,  and  later  England,  the  development 
proceeded  away  from  feudalism,  toward  a  form 
of  society  very  much  akin  to  that  of  the  later 
individualistic  era  after  the  French  Revolution. 
The  feudal  city  governments — the  patrician 
families — were  overthrown  by  the  industrial 
organization  of  artisans  and  merchants,  the 
guilds,  and  democratic  industrial  governments 
established.  Powerful  free  cities  and  feder- 
ations of  free  cities,  as  the  Ilansa,  arose,  broke 
away  from  feudalism — especially  when  the  in- 
vention of  gunpowder  made  the  armored 
knight  helpless — and  started  a  new  era. 

In  England,  protected  by  the  ocean,  this  re- 
organization of  society,  although  starting  much 
later  than  on  the  Continent,  survived  and  grad- 
ually merged  by  evolution  into  the  individual- 
istic age. 

This  is  England's  strength,  as  well  as  her  weak- 
ness. Derived  by  gradual  evolution  through 
centuries,  the  indivichialistic  industrial  age  is 
far  deeper  rooted  in  the  national  character  than 
in  nations  which  have  more  recently  emerged 
from  feudalism.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  nu- 
merous remnants  of  feudalism  have  survived, 
such  as  the  respect  for  lords,  the  reverence  for 


ERAS  IN   THE   WORLD'S   HISTORY 

titles,  etc.,  which  have  been  swept  away  in 
nations  where  the  transition  has  been  of  more 
revolutionary  character. 

On  the  Continent,  feudalism  once  more  tri- 
umphed over  the  industrial  city. 

With  increasing  subdivision  and  specializa- 
tion of  classes,  feudalism  finally  reached  its  last 
development  in  the  absolute  monarchy.  The 
"retainers"  of  the  lord  of  the  manor  became 
the  army  of  mercenaries  of  the  duke  or  king. 
The  king  thus  became  independent  of  the  vol- 
untary service  of  the  feudal  lords,  the  noblemen. 
Against  the  army  of  mercenaries,  maintained 
by  the  ruler,  the  individual  lord  or  the  indus- 
trial city  had  little  chance,  and  were  reduced  to 
submission. 

In  the  perpetual  wars  between  the  merce- 
nary armies  maintained  by  the  more  powerful 
rulers,  culminating  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War, 
central  Europe  was  laid  waste,  the  beginning  of 
the  new  industrial  era  wiped  out  with  the  de- 
struction of  the  prosperity  of  the  cities,  and  the 
absolute  feudal  monarchy  emerged,  as  exem- 
plified in  the  "grand  monarch,"  Louis  XIV.  of 
France;  the  monarch  was  the  state — L'etat 
c'est  mot — but  beneath  him  there  was  an  infi- 
nite graduation  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

nobility,  parallel  thereto  the  clergy,  and  far 
beneath  the  rightless  toiling  masses. 

But  in  this  development  of  the  absolute  mon- 
archy based  on  mercenary  armies,  feudalism 
had  ceased  to  be  commensal,  and  therewith  for- 
feited its  right  of  existence.  The  armies  of 
mercenaries  had  made  the  ruler  independent  of 
the  good-will  of  his  subjects.  The  enormous 
cost  of  the  large  armies  of  mercenaries  required 
in  the  perpetual  wars,  the  cost  of  maintaining 
the  estate  of  the  "grand  monarch,"  the  need  of 
attaching  the  nobility  to  the  court  by  sharing 
the  spoils  with  them,  all  this  meant  continu- 
ously increasing  exploitation  of  the  people,  and 
for  the  masses  it  was  no  more,  as  in  the  early 
'days  of  feudalism,  exchange  of  protection  for 
a  part  of  the  product  of  their  work,  but  it  was 
exploitation  by  everybody,  ceaseless  toil  and 
no  hope,  and  to  the  masses  the  feudal  society 
of  the  "grand  monarch"  offered  nothing.  There- 
fore they  had  no  interest  in  the  maintenance  of 
this  society,  their  lot  could  not  become  worse 
by  any  overthrow  of  society,  and  all  their  inter- 
ests thus  were  against  society,  and  became  rev- 
olutionary. 

When  incompetent  and  weak  rulers  followed 
the  "grand  monarch,"  the  storm  broke,  and  in 

10 


ERAS  IN  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY 

the  great  revolution  feudalism  was  submerged 
and  France  gave  the  world  a  new  era,  that  of 
individualism,  or  industrial  capitalism,  as  we 
may  call  it  by  its  present-day  characteristics. 

Other  developments  contributed  to  the  catas- 
trophic change  in  the  epoch  of  the  French  Rev- 
olution, which  overthrew  feudalism. 

The  individualism  of  the  industrial  cities  had 
been  vanquished  in  the  wars  of  the  mercenary 
armies,  but  not  entirely  extinguished,  and  from 
the  cities  gradually  permeated  all  society. 

The  steadily  deteriorating  condition  of  the 
masses,  and  parallel  thereto  the  degeneration  of 
the  ruling  classes,  created  an  increasing  disgust 
with  the  existing  form  of  society  among  the 
better  elements  of  tlie  privileged  classes;  we 
must  realize  that  in  the  declaration  of  the  rights 
of  man,  which  started  the  revolution,  the  nobil- 
ity and  clergy  voluntarily  gave  up  their  privi- 
leges over  the  tiers  eiat. 

The  invention  of  the  steam-engine  had  come 
and  had  begun  to  revolutionize  society;  com- 
merce and  trade  rose  to  increasing  power;  Eng- 
land had  solved  the  problem  of  feudalism  by  be- 
heading one  king  and  giving  the  walking-papers 
to  the  next  one  who  had  started  to  play  the 

"grand  monarch,"  and  had  brought  a  king  from 

11 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

abroad,  with  the  impHed  understanding  that 
he  would  follow  his  predecessor  if  he  took  him- 
self too  seriously;  and  England  was  gradually 
beginning  to  emerge  as  an  industrial  nation. 

The  American  colonies  had  revolted  and  set 
up  a  democracy,  declaiming  that  "all  men  are 
born  free  and  equal." 

Prussia,  under  Frederic  II.,  had  established 
compulsory  education,  had  educated  all  her 
subjects,  and  then  had  withheld  political  rights 
from  them. 

The  philosophy  of  Voltaire  and  his  contem- 
poraries had  with  destructive  logic  attacked  all 
accepted  standards,  from  royalty  to  religion, 
and  shattered  the  self-confidence  of  the  defend- 
ers of  established  order,  and  the  renaissance  of 
literature  had  spread  the  modern  ideas  through 
wide  circles.
