VII 

THE    OTHER    EUROPEAN    NATIONS    IN    THE    INDI- 
VIDUALISTIC  ERA 

FRxVNCE  has  never  become  a  great  industrial 
country  like  England  or  Germany.  Weak- 
ened by  a  generation  of  continual  war  under 
the  first  Napoleon,  its  recovery  retarded  by  the 
reactionary  period  under  the  unholy  alliance 
and  the  revolutions  of  1830  and  1848,  which  led 
to  the  Second  Empire  with  its  repeated  wars, 
and  ended  in  the  disastrous  Franco-Prussian 
war,  France  never  had  the  chance  of  undis- 
turbed industrial  development  which  other 
nations  had.  The  decreasing  birth-rate,  and 
finally  the  decreasing  population,  made  the 
social  problem  less  severe  than  in  nations  with 
rapidly  increasing  population,  as  Germany, 
where  national  production  had  to  provide  not 
only  for  the  existing  population,  but  for  a  great 
increase  of  population.  Adding  hereto  the 
thrift  and  the  saving  habits  of  the  French,  it 

87 


AMERICA  AND  THE   NEW  EPOCH 

is  easily  understood  that  France  became  a 
wealthy  country,  with  the  wealth  rather  dis- 
tributed in  moderate  fortunes  throughout  the 
entire  population,  and  not  massed  in  a  few 
vast  fortunes,  surrounded  by  a  poverty-stricken 
population,  as  in  the  industrial  nations. 

Though  France  was  unable  to  compete  with 
England  or  Germany  in  supplying  the  standard 
industrial  products  to  the  world's  markets,  the 
inborn  artistic  temperament  of  the  French  na- 
tion made  France  successful  in  a  limited  but 
very  profitable  field,  and  in  all  those  industries 
in  which  an  artistic  sense  is  necessary  France 
became,  and  is  to-day,  predominant  in  the 
markets  of  the  world,  and  has  no  competition 
to  fear. 

Thus  the  waves  of  the  conflict  for  industrial 
supremacy  between  England,  Germany,  and 
America  left  France  untouched. 

France's  rising  financial  power  was  repeatedly 
set  back — by  the  extravagance  of  the  Second 
Fmpire,  by  the  war  indemnity  to  Germany,  and 
remained  small  compared  with  that  of  England, 
and  in  any  case  did  not  threaten  England's 
supremacy;  as,  due  to  the  French  national  tem- 
perament, French  capital  was  to  a  small  extent 
only  invested  in  industrial  exploitation  of  for- 


OTHER  EUROrEAN  NATIONS 

oign  countries.  French  capital  built  the  Suez 
Canal,  while  the  world  stood  by,  scoffing;  but 
when  it  proved  a  success,  England  appropriated 
it.  The  attempt  to  build  the  Panama  Canal 
proved  an  impossible  task,  and  tropical  disease 
conquered;  it  was  only  after  medical  science 
had  conquered  tropical  disease,  largely  by  the 
work  of  the  American  Medical  Staff  in  Cuba 
and  in  the  Philippines,  that  the  construction  of 
the  Panama  Canal  became  possible  and  was 
accomplished  by  our  country. 

The  disastrous  financial  failure  of  the  French 
Panama  companies  discouraged  French  in- 
vestors, and  since  that  time  French  wealth  has 
largely  gone  into  governmental  loans  of  foreign 
nations,  especially  Russia.  Thus,  when  after 
Russia's  defeat  bj^  Japan  Russia,  nearly  bank- 
rupt, was  threatened  by  dissolution,  and  Po- 
land, the  Baltic  provinces,  and  Finland  rose  in 
revolution,  it  was  French  money  which  came 
to  Russia's  assistance;  it  was  the  money  of  the 
French  Republic  which  enabled  the  Russian 
autocracy  to  subjugate  the  nations  which  had 
tried  to  free  themselves  from  the  Russian  yoke. 

When  the  final  conflict  between  England  and 
Germany  approached,  France  hesitated  for  a 
moment.     But   the   English-speaking   nations 

89 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

were  her  best  customers;  the  defeat  in  the 
Franco-German  war  of  1870-71  still  rankled, 
and  when  Russia  joined  England  the  large  in- 
vestments in  Russian  loans  needed  protection, 
and  thus  France  joined  the  Allies. 

Russia  has  not  yet  approached  the  individ- 
ualistic era,  but  is  still  deep  in  feudalism.  An 
autocratic  monarchy,  discouraging  and  oppos- 
ing intelligence  and  education,  a  small  intellec- 
tual minority,  fully  as  educated,  intelligent, 
and  able  as  the  intellectual  classes  in  any  other 
country,  but  helpless  and  not  backed  by  a 
nation;  over  80  per  cent,  of  the  masses  are  still 
essentially  serfs,  are  illiterate  and  thereby 
deprived  of  the  means  of  communication  be- 
yond their  immediate  surroundings,  hence 
barred  from  any  intelligent  political  activity. 
The  attenuated  parliamentarism,  represented 
by  the  Duma,  thus  can  be  a  shadow  only;  but 
if  it  were  real  and  the  Duma  had  the  power  of 
the  British  Parliament,  it  would  probably 
plunge  the  nation  in  still  greater  misery  by  sub- 
stituting an  irresponsible  oligarchy  for  the  auto- 
cratic monarchy.  It  is  significant  that  the  con- 
ditions of  the  Russian  masses  have  been  best 
when  a  strong  autocrat  ruled,  and  most  un- 
favorable under  a  weak  ruler  like  the  present, 

DO 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

when  a  self-constituted  group  of  dukes  and 
bureaucrats  exploited  the  nation. 

The  "awakening"  of  a  "new  Russia"  by  the 
present  war,  of  which  we  hear  so  much,  thus  is 
an  idle  dream;  as  a  nation  Russia  is  further 
behind  than  Japan  was  when  the  American 
ships  opened  it  to  Western  civilization;  and  it 
took  Japan  two  generations  to  rise  to  equality 
with  the  Western  civilized  nations.  ^Vhat  Rus- 
sia needs  is  not  political  freedom  and  parlia- 
mentarism, but  an  enlightened  autocrat  like 
Frederic  II.  of  Prussia  was  in  the  middle  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  who  establishes  schools 
everywhere  throughout  the  country,  and  forces 
all  the  people  to  send  their  children  to  school. 
Then,  in  a  generation,  Russia  can  begin  to 
think  of  self-government. 

Industrially,  Russia  is  a  nation  of  vast  un- 
developed resources,  requiring  capital  for  its 
development,  just  as  Mexico,  South  America, 
China  does,  and  as  our  country  did  two  gen- 
erations ago. 

But  such  development  by  foreign  capital 
means  exploitation.  While  the  country  becomes 
prosperous — as  Mexico  was  under  Diaz — the 
prosperity  is  not  for  the  natives  of  the  country, 
but  the  wealth  of  the  country,  from  mines  and 

91 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

plantations,  enriches  foreign  nations,  and  the 
lot  of  the  natives  is  a  steady  depression  of  their 
standard  of  living  toward  serfdom,  or,  as  we 
now  call  it,  peonage.  Our  country  has  luckily 
escaped  this  faLc,  due  to  the  enterprise  and 
ability  of  the  mixed  races  which  had  settled  it; 
but  in  the  Mexico  of  to-day  we  see  the  result 
of  the  development  of  a  country  by  foreign 
capital  in  the  individualistic  era.  Russia  be- 
fore the  war  was  being  "developed"  largely  by 
the  Germans,  and  much  of  the  hatred  of  the 
Russian  against  the  German  thus  is  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  of  the  Mexican  against  the 
American. 

Politically,  Russia's  position  has  been  con- 
sistent for  centuries.  Christianized  from  Con- 
stantinople, by  the  Greek  Catholic  church,  it 
was  under  the  influence  of  the  East  Roman 
Empire,  and  when  this  empire  ended  by  the 
conquest  of  Constantinople  by  the  Turks  in 
1453,  the  Russian  ruler,  related  by  marriage 
to  the  last  Paln'ologus,  naturally  considered 
himself  as  the  heir  to  East  Rome,  and  the  dream 
of  Russia  has  been  ever  since  the  restoration  of 
the  East  Roman  Empire  as  pan-Slavic  power, 
with  the  Czar  as  ruler  in  the  old  capital  "Czar- 
grad" — Constantinople — just  as  the  dream  of 

92 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

the  Germans  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  the  resto- 
ration of  the  West  Roman  Empire,  of  German 
nationality. 

Twice  Russia  was  close  to  the  goal;  in  the 
first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  (1839), 
when  my  countryman,  Diebitsch  Sabalkanski, 
forced  the  "impregnable"  Balkan  range,  and 
finally  in  1878,  when  the  Russian  army  had 
penetrated  to  the  walls  of  Constantinople,  but 
both  times  it  was  defeated  by  British  jealousy; 
the  British  war  fleet,  passing  the  Dardanelles, 
anchored  before  Constantinople,  and  the  Con- 
gress of  Berlin,  under  Bismarck  and  Lord  Bea- 
consfield,  >tore  up  the  peace  of  San  Stephano. 
Baffled  in  the  Balkans,  Russia  then  turned  her 
eyes  toward  a  Pacific  empire,  but  here  again 
England's  backing  of  Japan  led  to  Russian  de- 
feat. England  feared  for  her  Indian  empire, 
which  Russia's  rising  power  seemed  to  threaten, 
as  in  central  Asia  the  Russian  frontier  had  grad- 
ually crept  close  to  the  northern  frontier  of 
India. 

The  territory  conquered,  "liberated"  by  Rus- 
sia in  the  Balkans,  which  England  did  not  allow 
her  to  retain,  was  formed  into  small  separate 
nations,  under  Turkish  sovereignty,  and  so 
Roumania,  Servia,  Bulgaria,  originated.     Rus- 

93 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

sia  accepted  tliis  as  a  transition  state,  a  tempo- 
rary condition,  until  the  time  when  Russia  could 
completely  absorb  these  countries,  as  she  had 
done  with  Poland  and  Finland,  as  England  did 
with  Egypt,  and  Austria  with  Bosnia.  But 
after  some  time  these  nations  began  to  take 
themselves  seriously,  developed  a  national 
individuality,  especially  the  more  highly  civil- 
ized ones — Roumania  and  Bulgaria — and  re- 
fused to  be  swallowed,  and  now  lie  as  a  barrier 
between  Russia  and  her  Turkish  prey.  xAt  the 
treaty  of  Berlin,  in  1878,  England  erected  still 
another  and  stronger  barrier  against  Russia, 
when  she  gave  Bosnia  and  the  Herzegovina — 
which  had  been  destined  for  Servia — to  Austria, 
and  thus  established  Austria  on  the  Balkan 
Peninsula.  Naturally  then,  Servia,  deprived  of 
its  booty,  has  ever  since  leaned  toward  Russia, 
and  become  practically  a  Russian  dependency, 
while  Roumania  and  Bulgaria  gravitated  into 
the  Austrian  sphere  of  influence,  since  it  was 
Russia  which  threatened  their  national  exist- 
ence, by  considering  them  as  a  temporary  ar- 
rangement, pending  absorption  by  Russia. 
Thus  the  alignment  of  these  nations  in  the 
present  war  was  to  be  expected,  in  spite  of  the 
enmity  between  Bulgaria  and  Roumania,  en- 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

gendered  by  the  second  Balkan  war.  Racial 
differences  contributed:  Scrvia  is  Greek  Cath- 
olic Slav,  like  Russia.  Roumania,  however,  is 
Latin,  is  the  last  colony  of  the  ancient  Roman 
Empire,  its  language  closer  to  the  Latin  of  the 
later  empire  than  any  other  modern  language, 
and  it  is  thereby  closely  attached  to  Italy. 
Bulgaria,  while  speaking  a  Slav  language  since 
the  days  of  the  great  Servian  Empire  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  is  of  different  race  from  Slav  or 
Latin,  nearer  related  to  the  Magyar  race  of 
Hungary. 

Thus  England,  fearing  Russia,  had  closed  and 
double-locked  the  gates  against  Russian  expan- 
sion in  the  Balkans,  had  made  the  Dardanelles 
a  closed  strait,  so  as  to  blockade  Russia  in  the 
Black  Sea.  But  when  the  greater  danger  from 
Germany's  rising  financial  power  threatened, 
England  withdrew  her  objection  against  Rus- 
sia's occupation  of  Constantinople,  and  prom- 
ised her  assistance  to  this  end.  This  attached 
feudal  Russia  to  individualistic  England. 

But  there  is  still  the  old  divergency  of  inter- 
est and  mutual  suspicion  between  Russia  and 
England,  and  makes  itself  felt  to  the  disad- 
vantage of  the  Allies  in  this  war;  England's  aim 
is  to  destroy  Germany,  but  to  save  Austria  as 

7  95 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

much  as  possible  as  future  counter-weight 
against  Russia.  Therefore,  also,  the  British 
expedition  into  Mesopotamia,  into  Persia,  to 
occupy  as  much  Turkish  territory  as  possible, 
and  to  keep  it  frojn  falling  into  Russia's  hands. 
On  the  other  hand,  Russia  would  prefer  Ger- 
many to  remain  sufficiently  strong  to  keep 
England  in  check  after  the  war,  but  desires 
Austria,  the  barrier  in  the  Balkans,  destroyed. 
Therefore  Russia  consistently  directed  her 
drives  against  Austria,  in  her  own  interest,  in- 
stead of  against  Germany,  in  England's  interest. 
There  are  probably  differences  of  interest, 
also,  within  the  Central  Powers,  though  less  pro- 
nounced. Germany  is  the  nation  which  threat- 
ened the  individualistic  era  by  her  co-operative 
industrial  organization,  and  Austria  is  the  most 
conservative  and  correspondingly  backward 
nation  within  this  group,  while  Hungary  is 
closely  attached  to  Germany  in  its  social  in- 
dustrial development,  as  well  as  politically. 
When  in  1848  Hungary  attempted  to  make  her- 
self independent,  a  Russian  army  reconquered 
her  for  Austria,  while  Prussia's  victory  over 
Austria  in  1866  gave  Hungary  its  freedom.  Aus- 
tria, as  the  weakest  member,  had  to  be  pulled 
along  by  her  two  stronger  neighbors,  Germany 

9G 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

and  Hungary.  Thus  when  in  the  first  year  of 
the  war  Austria's  military  organization  broke 
down,  Germany  reorganized  the  armies;  when, 
later  on,  the  economic  pressure  resulting  from  the 
food  blockade  threatened  Austria,  Germany 
again  had  to  organize  Austria's  internal  economy. 

Austria,  however,  was  the  leading  nation  in 
central  Europe  before  Germany.  Her  emperor  is 
of  the  oldest  and  most  exclusive  roj^al  family-, 
her  nobility  still  far  more  self-conscious  than 
that  of  Germany,  and  there  naturally  remained 
some  feeling  of  jealousy  against  Germany  as  the 
upstart  leader.  It,  therefore,  is  probably  not 
without  intention  that  Germany  does  not  like 
to  see  Austria  become  too  prominent.  Thus 
Germany's  help  against  Servia  came  only  when 
the  Turkish  Empire  found  itself  in  such  danger 
as  to  make  German  assistance  necessary.  In 
this  connection  it  may  be  significant  that  while 
the  German  drive  against  Russia  in  1915  carried 
the  frontier  of  the  Central  Powers  forward  for 
hundreds  of  miles,  beyond  the  limits  of  Poland, 
in  the  southeast  corner  of  Galicia  some  Austrian 
territory  was  left  in  Russian  hands,  and  the 
Allies  in  Salonica  and  the  Italians  in  Avlona 
were  allowed  to  retain  their  hold. 

Poland  as  an  independent  state  ended  over  a 

97 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

century  ago,  and  was  divided  between  Austria, 
Prussia,  and  Russia.  But  as  a  nation  Poland 
still  lives;  indeed,  the  national  self-conscious- 
ness of  the  Poles  greatly  increased  after  the  dis- 
memberment of  the  nation,  just  as  that  of  Ger- 
many in  the  period  after  the  Thirty  Years'  War. 
The  large  and  valuable  Polish  literature  prac- 
tically all  dates  from  the  time  after  the  division 
of  Poland.  The  Poles  were  a  civilized  nation 
long  before  the  Russians;  they  were  Christian- 
ized from  the  west,  from  Rome,  are  Roman 
Catholics,  and  between  them  and  the  Greek 
Catholic  Russians  stands  the  unbridgeable  bar- 
rier of  hatred,  which  is  greater  than  any  other 
among  men,  that  of  religious  persecution  and 
oppression.  Germany  has  politically  oppressed 
the  Poles,  but  Germany  has  little  Polish  terri- 
tory, and  even  there  the  majority  of  the  popu- 
lation is  German,  because  Prussian  Poland  was 
given  to  Russia  by  Napoleon,  after  Prussia's 
defeat.  Austria  has  a  large  Polish  population 
in  Galicia.  Austria  has  never  oppressed  the 
Poles,  but  has  given  them  equal  political  and 
social  rights,  so  that  there  is  little  enmity  be- 
tween Austrian  and  Pole,  and  as  Austria  is  the 
leading  Roman  CathoHc  nation,  the  Poles  have 
begun  to  look  toward  Austria  as  their  protector, 

98 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

since  their  old  protector,  France,  betrayed  them 
when,  after  the  Japanese  war,  France  financed 
Russia  to  defeat  Poland's  attempt  for  independ- 
ence, and  England  abandoned  the  Poles  in 
allying  herself  with  Russia. 

Thus  a  reconstructed  Poland,  too  small  a 
nation  to  stand  entirely  independent,  would 
probably  gravitate  toward  Austria  as  protector, 
assuming  a  position  similar  to  Hungary. 

Switzerland  has  an  army,  small,  but  not  neg- 
ligible, and  while  entirely  surrounded  by  the 
war,  situated  as  it  is  on  the  heights  of  the  Alps, 
no  convenient  pathway  of  armies  leads  through 
it,  and  thus  its  neutrality  is  not  likely  to  be 
violated  like  that  of  Greece  or  Belgium. 

Greece  is  the  only  nation  whose  entire  inter- 
est is  to  remain  neutral  at  any  sacrifice,  for  an 
alliance  with  the  Central  Powers  would  be  sui- 
cide, with  the  enormous  coast-line  exposed  to 
the  attacks  of  the  Allies,  while  a  union  with  the 
Allies  would  bring  down  the  thunderbolt  in  the 
fate  of  Servia  and  Belgium. 

The  Turkish  power  has  been  steadily  declin- 
ing since  the  days  of  Suleiman  II.,  and  if  it  had 
not  been  for  the  jealousy  of  the  European  na- 
tions the  Turks  would  have  been  driven  out  of 
Europe  long  ago.    But  for  a  century  England 

99 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

protected  Turkey  against  Russia — at  a  price, 
however:  Cyprus,  Egypt,  and  the  Sudan,  etc. 
When  abandoned  by  England,  in  her  approach 
to  Russia,  Turkey  naturally  allied  herself  with 
Germany  as  the  only  great  military  power 
which  had  no  frontier  adjoining  Turkey  and 
thus  did  not  endanger  the  integrity  of  the 
remnant  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  but  merelj^  de- 
sired commercial  exploitation  as  compensation. 
It  must  be  realized,  however,  that  there  has 
been  an  awakening,  and  a  revival  of  Moham- 
medanism resultant  from  the  war.  Christianity 
has  preached  for  twenty  centuries,  "Love  your 
enemies,"  and  as  the  result  all  the  civilized 
Christian  nations  slaughter  their  enemies  by 
the  hundred  thousands.  But  Mohammedanism 
has  taught,  "Help  your  friends  and  kill  your 
enemies,"  and  so  the  Mohammedan  honestly 
practises  his  religious  belief,  while  it  requires  a 
very  highly  developed  state  of  hypocrisy  for 
the  Christian  nations  to  harmonize  their  actions 
with  their  professed  religion. 

Japan,  in  the  Far  East,  while  a  party  to  the 
world's  war,  is  really  outside  of  it.  Looking 
only  after  her  own  interest,  she  is  writing  the 
Monroe  Doctrine  of  Asia  into  the  book  of  his- 
tory: "Asia  for  the  Asiatics."     In  the  Chinese 

100 


OTHER  EUROPEAN  NATIONS 

war  of  1894  she  acquired  the  leadership  of  the 
yellow  race;  but  the  European  nations  de- 
prived her  of  the  fruit  of  victory,  and  divided 
between  themselves  the  territories  which  Japan 
had  conquered.  Japan  had  to  bide  her  time. 
In  the  Boxer  revolution  she  took  a  leading  part 
in  the  punitive  expedition  and  so  deprived  it 
of  any  racial  significance.  When  the  time  was 
ripe  Japan  struck  Russia,  deprived  her  of  the 
spoils  taken  in  1894,  and  ended  the  dream  of 
Russia's  Pacific  empire.  Another  ten  years,  and 
Germany  felt  Japan's  retaliation  and  had  to 
abandon  her  spoils.  But  England  also  had 
profited  from  Japan's  coercion  in  1894,  and  it 
is  significant  that  Japan  has  taken  not  only 
the  German  possessions  in  China,  but  also  the 
German  islands  in  the  Pacific,  and  is  holding 
them  as  "strategic  positions."  Against  whom? 
Not  against  Germany;  but  they  are  strategic 
positions  against  England's  colonies. 

We,  as  Americans,  may  desire  the  "open 
door"  in  China,  but  as  believers  in  the  Monroe 
Doctrine — "America  for  the  Americans" — we 
cannot  honestly  dispute  Japan's  "Asia  for  the 
Asiatics,"  if  Japan  is  capable  of  making  good 
in  civilization.  And  there  is  no  doubt  about 
this,  for  the  yellow  race  is  the  only  one  which 

101 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

has  been  capable  of  disputing  with  the  white 
race  the  leadership  in  civilization,  and,  indeed, 
has  held  the  leadership  in  some  periods  in  the 
world's  history.  Thus  there  will  be  a  gradual 
coalition  of  Japan  with  her  defeated  enemies, 
Russia  and  Germany,  in  her  preparation  to 
drive  England  out  of  the  Far  East. 

It  is  necessary  to  shortly  discuss  the  situation 
of  the  various  nations  to  understand  their  align- 
ment in  the  world's  war  and  to  realize  the  com- 
plexity of  the  issues:  while  primarily  it  is  the 
inevitable  conflict  between  the  old  and  the  new 
era,  between  England  and  Germany,  all  the 
issues  between  the  nations,  which  lay  slumber- 
ing, have  flared  up  and  are  being  fought  out, 
such  as  Russia's  aim  for  Constantinople,  Po- 
land's restoration,  the  desire  of  the  Balkan  na- 
tions to  safeguard  their  national  independence, 
etc.,  and  these  secondary  issues  necessarily  more 
or  less  modified  and  controlled  the  conduct  and 
the  theater  of  the  war,  and  so  tended  to  obscure 
the  main  issue.
