IX 

AMERICA   IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

DURING  the  Civil  War,  when  industrial 
capitalism  extended  its  sway  over  the  en- 
tire United  States,  and  in  the  years  following 
the  war  we  were  in  the  first  period  of  the  indi- 
vidualistic era,  that  of  numerous  small  and 
independent  producers,  all  more  or  less  success- 
ful, due  to  the  still  almost  untouched  resources 
of  the  new  continent.  Then  we  had  a  large, 
prosperous  middle  class,  and  little  diflSculty  ex- 
isted for  any  man  with  a  fair  amount  of  intelli- 
gence and  ambition  to  rise  to  independence. 
These  were  the  golden  days,  to  which  our  in- 
dividualists hark  back,  which  our  legislatures 
and  governments  attempt  to  restore  by  legal 
enactments.  But  the  world  does  not  stand 
still,  for  standstill  is  death;  in  free  competition, 
the  more  successful  producers  destroyed  the  less 
successful  ones;  companies  and  corporations 
formed  and  absorbed  or  defeated  the  individual 

119 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

producers,  the  Larger  corporations  absorbed  or 
vanquished  the  smaller  ones,  combined  with 
each  other  in  still  larger  ones,  and  so,  by  the 
working  of  inexorable  economic  laws,  the  con- 
solidation of  the  industries  progressed  from 
numerous  small  producers  to  the  formation  of 
huge  corporations,  w^ith  competition  steadily 
growing  more  strenuous,  more  intense,  and  more 
destructive. 

Finally,  in  the  90's  the  end  was  reached; 
especially  in  those  industries  which  had  been 
organized  into  a  few  large  corporations.  The 
necessity  of  keeping  the  factories  going,  with 
the  steadily  increasing  excess  of  productive 
capacity  over  the  demand  for  the  products,  had 
made  competition  so  vicious  that  it  threatened 
with  destruction  the  victor  as  well  as  the  van- 
quished, in  a  universal  v.Tcck  of  the  industry. 

Thus  co-operation  had  to  come,  of  neces- 
sity, to  avoid  the  destructive  effects  of  com- 
petition. 

Thus  co-operative  agreements  between  for- 
merly competing  corporations  came,  and  the 
individualistic  era  seemed  to  approach  its  end, 
the  co-operative  era  to  arrive. 

The  fundamental  jirinciple  of  industrial  co- 
operation between  corporations  in  the  same  or 

120 


AMERICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

similar  fields  comprise  control  of  production; 
control   of  prices;    interchange   of  information. 

Control  of  production  7neans:  Elimination  of 
the  constantly  recurring  periods  of  business 
depression  and  business  boom,  by  restricting 
excessive  production  in  boom  times,  and  main- 
taining production  in  times  of  impaired  busi- 
ness confidence  by  manufacture  for  stock,  by 
encouraging  consumption  by  means  of  long- 
extended  credits,  acceptance  of  stock  in  pay- 
ment, financial  assistance  for  starting  new  en- 
terprises and  extending  existing  ones,  etc. 

Elimination  of  unrestricted  competition  is 
accomplished  by  dividing  the  production  be- 
tween the  corporations  in  a  definite  percentage 
based  on  their  previous  business,  or  their  capi- 
talization, or  their  producing  facilities;  or  by 
dividing  the  business  territorially,  or  by  divid- 
ing it  by  the  character  of  the  manufactured 
products,  etc. 

Control  of  prices  means:  Agreement  on  the 
same  prices  by  all  producers,  either  by  definitely 
fixing  such  prices,  where  such  is  possible,  with 
periodic  readjustment;  or  by  an  agreement  on 
the  methods  of  computing  selling  prices  from 
the  individual  items  of  the  cost  of  production, 
etc. 

121 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW   EPOCH 

Agreement  on  the  legitimate  profits  of  the 
middlemen,  by  fixing  the  retail  prices,  etc. 

Interchange  of  information  includes:  Inter- 
change of  technical  information  and  experience 
between  manufacturing  and  technical  staffs, 
joint  use  and  interchange  of  patent  rights, 
trade-marks,  etc. 

Mutual  consultation  on  administrative  prob- 
lems, commercial  and  financial  questions,  etc. 

Mutual  holdings  of  stock  of  the  corporations, 
interlocking  directorates,  etc. 

Practically  all  these  necessary  requirements 
for  safely  guiding  our  industrial  prosperity  from 
the  competitive  age,  which  has  failed  and  is 
dead,  into  the  coming  co-operative  age,  have 
been  outlawed  by  our  Government. 

The  result  is  that  from  the  beginning  of  this 
century,  when  the  corporate  development  of 
industry  was  arrested  by  the  interference  of  the 
Government,  instigated  by  a  misguided  public 
demand,  our  industrial  development  has  not 
progressed,  but  lapsed  back;  the  industries 
have  grown  larger,  the  corporations  financially 
more  powerful,  but  as  an  industrial  nation  we 
have  gone  backward  with  increasing  rapidity. 
Competition  has  not  been  restored;  no  polit- 
ical law  can  resurrect  a  corpse,  and  while  you 


AMERICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

can  forbid  co-operation  by  legislation,  you  can- 
not by  law  order  people  or  corporations  to 
commit  suicide. 

The  result  thus  has  been  increasing  dis- 
organization, interference,  inefficiency,  and 
waste,  leading  to  an  industrial  chaos  just  as 
regrettable  for  our  national  welfare  as  un- 
necessary. 

What  were  the  causes  for  this  forcible  arrest 
of  the  natural  industrial  development  of  our 
nation,  which  threatens  its  future  welfare,  nay, 
even  its  existence.'^ 

"While  in  other  nations  the  industrial  devel- 
opment was  fairly  uniform  throughout  the  na- 
tion, in  our  nation  the  development  in  the 
Eastern  States  was  about  a  generation  ahead 
of  that  in  the  middle  West  and  the  West.  Thus, 
when  in  the  East  the  corporate  organization  ap- 
proached the  co-operative  stage  there  was  still 
a  large  class  of  small,  individual  producers  in 
the  West  who  felt  their  existence  threatened  by 
the  rise  of  corporate  industrial  power,  and  were 
ready  to  fight  the  corporation  by  all  means,  po- 
litical and  otherwise,  in  the  vain  attempt  to 
avoid  the  inevitable,  the  extinction  of  the  small 
producer  before  the  higher  efficiency  of  organ- 
ized  corporate   production.     Add   thereto  the 

123 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

not  negligible  independent  middle  class,  which 
still  exists  in  the  East,  and  all  those  who  have 
tried  and  failed,  and  therefore  naturally  hate 
those  who  have  succeeded  in  organizing  big 
production,  and  we  §et  a  formidable  political 
power;  but,  however  much  we  may  sympathize 
with  the  individual  who  desires  to  preserve  his 
industrial  independence,  it  is  a  reactionary 
movement,  however  progressive  some  of  its 
leaders  may  call  themselves,  and  either  the  re- 
actionary forces  must  be  overcome  by  educa- 
tion and  otherwise,  or  the  nation's  progress  is 
threatened. 

•An  equally  serious  enemy  to  the  progress 
toward  co-operation  is  the  strong  individualistic 
temperament  of  a  large  part  of  the  American 
citizens,  especially  those  who  come  from  Anglo- 
Saxon  descent;  the  attitude  of  mind  which 
rather  wishes  to  be  the  first  in  a  small  puddle 
than  the  second  in  the  wide  ocean;  tempera- 
ments who  prefer  to  be  president  of  a  ten- 
thousand-dollar  business  rather  than  assistant 
to  the  president  of  a  hundred-million-dollar 
corporation.  We  must  also  consider  that  many 
of  the  organizers  and  corporation  leaders  are 
pronounced  individualists,  do  not  understand 
what  they   arc  doing  and   whereto  the  path 

124 


AP^lEllICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

leads  into  which  economic  laws  forced  them,  and 
thus  leadership  in  the  transition  from  competi- 
tion to  co-operation  by  men  understanding  the 
industrial  situation  and  its  needs  has  often  been 
lacking. 

Then  there  was  antagonism  of  the  labor  inter- 
ests, unjustified  and  illogical,  indeed,  since  all 
labor  organizations  are  based  on  the  principle  of 
co-operation.  However,  they  feared  the  greater 
power  of  organized  industrial  capital  and  point 
to  powerful  corporations  who  have  kept  union- 
ism out  of  their  works.  And  in  the  days  when 
this  popular  resentment  against  corporate  or- 
ganization originated,  there  were  some  indus- 
trial controversies  fought  to  a  finish  by  the 
corporations,  to  the  suppression  of  the  labor 
organizations,  possibly  beyond  the  point  where 
social  wisdom  should  have  called  a  halt  in  the 
interest  of  future  co-operation  and  friendly  feel- 
ing with  the  masses  of  the  people. 

One  of  the  most  serious  causes  of  the  rise  of 
popular  resentment  against  the  corporations 
was  the  character  of  the  corporation  itself,  es- 
pecially in  the  early  days,  its  crudeness  and 
inefficiency,  which  in  many  cases  led  to  a  failure 
of  realizing  the  advantage  expected  from  co- 
operation.   There  is  no  constructive  supervisory 

U5 


AMERICA  AND   THE  NEW  EPOCH 

power,  in  our  country,  as  was  represented  by  the 
central  Govermncnt  in  Germany;  our  Govern- 
ments, from  the  federal  down  to  the  municipal, 
are  not  organized  for  constructive  activity,  and 
thus  their  entrance  in  the  field  is  largely  inhibi- 
tory, liable  to  disorganize  by  interference.  The 
tariff  wall  excluded  the  check  afforded  by  com- 
petition with  other  nations.  Thus  over-capi- 
talization was  frequent,  and  seriously  handi- 
capped some  corporations  for  years,  until  their 
business  had  grown  up  to  their  capitalization. 
Sometimes  the  over-capitalization  was  inten- 
tional; water,  or  the  result  of  excessive  organi- 
zation charges;  but  the  most  frequent  and  most 
serious,  because  unavoidable,  cause  was  the 
necessarily  excessive  cost  of  absorbing  smaller 
competitors;  the  price  usually  is  not  the  value 
of  the  competitor's  business;  often  this  is  nil — 
but  is  based  on  the  harm  which  the  competitor 
could  do  in  unrestrained  competition,  before  it 
is  destroyed.  Thus  millions  have  been  paid 
for  competitors  which  brought  in  practically  no 
assets,  and  still  it  was  a  good  bargain,  since  still 
more  millions  would  have  been  lost  in  fighting 
the  competitor. 

Occasionally  even  competing  comi)anics  have 
been  organized,  not  for  honest  industrial  pro- 

126 


AMERICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

duciion,  but  for  forcing  an  established  corpora- 
tion to  buy  it  out — a  kind  of  blackmail  against 
which  no  protection  existed. 

Thus  the  industrial  consolidation  was  accom- 
plished at  heavy  sacrifice  in  capital,  and  corre- 
sponding sacrifice  in  economic  efficiency.  An- 
other incident  in  causing  public  hostility  was 
the  wreckers — those  financiers  who  organized  or 
got  control  of  corporations,  not  for  industrial 
production,  but  to  get  quickly  as  much  out  of 
them  as  possible,  and  then  abandon  them, 
squeezed  out  and  wrecked.  Some  names  of  the 
previous  generation  are  still  remembered. 

A  most  serious  cause  of  the  popular  antago- 
nism was  the  failure  of  the  corporation  in  one 
of  its  most  important  activities,  that  of  the 
social  relations  to  its  employees  and  to  the 
public  at  large.  In  those  early  days  the  leaders 
and  organizers  of  corporate  production  were  al- 
together too  much  inclined  to  consider  the  cor- 
poration as  their  own  private  property,  and  felt 
that  paying  such  wages  as  they  had  to  pay  to 
get  efficient  workers  comprised  all  their  rela- 
tions to  the  em])loyees,  and  that  toward  the 
general  public  they  had  no  obligations  at  all. 
But  while  against  the  individual  small  employer 
of  Lincoln's  days  the  individual  employee  or 

9  127 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

the  public  could  help  themselves,  they  became 
helpless  against  the  corporate  power  of  organized 
industry. 

The  first  time  this  was  forcibly  impressed 
upon  the  public  by  the  great  anthracite-coal 
strike,  when  miners  and  mine-owners  could  not 
agree,  and  as  the  result  the  people  of  New 
England  suffered,  their  children  died  from  ex- 
posure, until  finally  the  Federal  Government 
had  to  interfere  in  the  "private  relations"  be- 
tween employer  and  employee,  in  the  interest 
of  public  welfare.  The  change  brought  about 
by  the  corporate  development,  in  the  power 
relation  between  the  individual  employee  or 
the  general  public  and  the  industrial  employer, 
necessarily  placed  upon  the  corporation  the 
duty  to  establish  an  efficient  equivalent  for  the 
self-help  of  the  individual.  This  is  now  gradu- 
ally being  recognized  by  the  corporations,  and 
more  and  more  the  social  (and  educational,  as 
part  thereof)  relations  with  the  employees  and 
the  general  public  have  become  a  recognized  part 
of  corporation  activity.  But  it  took  a  long  time 
for  the  corporations  to  realize  it,  and  great  harm 
had  been  done  in  the  mean  time  to  the  relation 
between  corporation  and  pul)llc. 

It  is  in  this  direction  that  we  must  hope  for 

128 


AMERICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

the  bringing  about  of  a  better  understanding 
between  corporate  industrial  organization  and 
the  general  public. 

To  a  rapidly  increasing  extent  the  industrial 
corporations  thus  realize  their  social  duties, 
perceive  that  the  establishment  and  preserva- 
tion of  harmonious  social  relations  between  the 
industrial  corporation  and  the  public,  including 
its  employees,  is  an  essential  and  important 
part  of  corporation  activity.  Nevertheless,  in 
most  corporations  this  activity  is  still  very  far 
from  what  it  must  be  to  restore  industrial  peace. 
We  need  only  to  look  at  the  names  of  the  men 
who  are  in  charge  of  the  social  activities  of  even 
very  progressive  corporations,  and  we  cannot 
fail  to  realize  that  very  often  they  q,re  not  the 
same  class  of  men,  not  of  the  same  caliber,  as 
the  men  in  charge  of  the  technical,  the  admin- 
istrative, and  the  financial  activities  of  the 
corporation. 

However,  there  is  a  rapid  progress  noticeable 
in  this  direction. 

All  this  makes  us  realize  that  the  present 
wide-spread  hostility  against  corporations  is  not 
the  work  of  irresponsible  demagogues,  but  is 
the  result  of  causes,  deep-seated  in  our  national 
and  industrial  development,  and  therefore  re- 

129 


AMERICA  AND  THE  NEW  EPOCH 

quires  the  fullest  attention  of  industry's  most 
competent  and  able  leaders. 

The  powerful,  co-operating  group  of  corpora- 
tions, controlling  an  industry  or  a  group  of  in- 
dustries, if  in  the  control  of  irresponsible  men 
for  selfish  purposes,  is  a  far  more  dangerous 
menace  to  the  public  than  were  the  isolated 
small  producers  of  bygone  days;  but  so  is  a 
sharp-edged  tool  far  more  dangerous  in  the 
hand  of  the  vicious  or  criminal  than  a  dull  one, 
and  still  nobody  but  a  fool  would  dull  his  tools 
when  he  desires  to  accomplish  results.  But  this 
is  exactly  what  we  as  a  nation  have  been  doing 
steadily  during  the  last  eight  years:  we  at- 
tempt to  destroy  by  legislation  modern  indus- 
try's most  efficient  tool,  outlaw  all  the  actions 
which  are  necessary  for  industrial  efficiency,  and 
gradually  get  into  the  hysterical  state  where  we 
begin  to  consider  mere  bigness  and  efficiency  as 
criminal. 

In  the  mean  time  the  old  world  has  gone  to 
pieces  in  Europe,  and  a  new  one,  an  era  of  co- 
operation, begins  to  rise  from  the  ruins.  Ger- 
many already  has  organized  its  industries  co- 
operatively, has  encouraged  and  almost  enforced 
by  governmental  acts  all  those  co-operative 
activities  of  corporations  which  we  have  out- 

130 


AMERICA  IN  THE  INDIVIDUALISTIC  ERA 

lawed,  and  an  industrial  eflSciency  resulted 
which  became  a  menace  to  the  individualistic 
nations  and  led  to  the  war,  as  discussed  before. 
England  is  reorganizing  co-operatively  its  in- 
dustrial and  financial  system,  apparently  un- 
noticed and  unobserved  by  us,  at  least  in  its 
significance,  and  is  progressing  in  it  at  a  rate  of 
which  we  do  not  dream,  and  against  the  new 
Europe,  as  it  will  emerge  from  the  war,  our  na- 
tion, with  its  present  suicidal  policy  of  industrial 
self-destruction,  will  be  hopelessly  outclassed. 

This  is  the  real  danger  which  the  European 
war  threatens  to  us — not  a  foreign  invasion — 
quite  likely  this  is  the  last  great  military  war 
the  world  will  ever  see,  but  an  industrial  war, 
and  the  destruction  of  a  continent,  our  own 
America,  by  the  high  economic  efficiency  of  the 
co-operative  industrial  organization  of  the  na- 
tions tried  in  the  fire  of  the  European  war — 
unless  we  awake  in  time,  and  prepare — not 
battle-ships  and  armies,  however  useful  they 
may  be  in  their  lunited  sphere,  but  friendly  re- 
lations based  on  the  recognition  of  their  inter- 
ests, between  all  really  progressive  elements  of 
society,  finding  their  expression  in  legislation 
that  will  advance  instead  of  retard  industrial 
co-operation.
